Nine in 10 young people in the UK
believe that their life is lacking
purpose and a lot of people are turning
back to religion. There is something
going on.
>> This is about the most important thing
that anyone could ever find out about
their life and God has made us for a
purpose and the purpose flows from that
meaning.
>> I kind of reject that cuz this is a
perfect example of a solution being
provided without explaining exactly why
it provides a solution and that's what
people are doing in religious
traditions. I hard disagree. For me,
finding meaning and purpose is like a
very practical thing.
>> And that's what I want to talk about
today.
>> We are joined by an atheist, Christian,
and spiritual thinker
>> to find an answer to the purpose crisis
millions are facing today.
>> One of the reasons that I'm a Christian
is because it's the best explanation for
the way things are.
>> But if Christianity were true, we would
not expect the kind of suffering that is
present in the world.
>> So, I'm very curious. What if I died
from cancer at 1 years old?
>> So, someone violated God's commands and
that had an impact on the world. So
children get cancer because a few
million years ago someone ate a fruit.
If you want religion to provide
existential comfort for people who are
suffering, you have to do more in the
face of children dying of cancer than
some reference to mythical human beings.
>> But if your worldview does not have a
way of making sense or moral intuitions
about suffering, it's not an adequate
worldview.
>> What I would say a science and
spirituality can really add is it's
effective in terms of reducing
suicidality, improving resilience,
giving them a reason to wake up in the
morning. And we'll get into that. And
Alex, if someone's listening now and
they feel lost in their life, is there
any advice that you could give them?
>> So, as an atheist, I'm offering a
psychological explanation. So, I would
recommend that they
>> You're spot on, Alex. So, the first
thing to understand is it is an internal
feeling. And we found in our study that
if you your sense of purpose increases
by 68%.
[Music]
>> Ole, Greg,
Alex.
The reason I wanted to speak to all
three of you today is to discuss meaning
and purpose. And there's some stats that
I wanted to share that kind of frame the
discussion. Three in five young
Americans believe that their life lacks
purpose. Nine in 10 young people in the
UK believe that their life is lacking
purpose. And when I look across other
stats as it relates to things like
mental health, 59% of Brits said they
lived a meaningful life compared to just
25% who said they did not. In an October
21 survey, 34% of men in the UK said
life had no meaning compared to 18% of
women and 50% of the same group who said
that their lives lack purpose and
meaning said that their poor mental
health was linked to not knowing what to
do with their life. Mhm.
>> And to give some further stats which I
found really interesting around the rise
of religiosity, in the UK, a belief in
God amongst 18 to 24 year olds has risen
from 18% in 2021 to 37% in 2025
according to Yuggov. And in the UK,
monthly church attendance has risen from
4% up to 15% in 2025.
There is something going on
>> and that's what I want to talk about
today. But before we do that, I'd love
to understand the perspective that all
of you bring to this conversation. So if
I start with yourself, Alec,
>> you know, it's it's interesting you
mentioned a lot about mental health. I'm
a psychiatrist. So for me, finding
meaning and purpose is like a very
practical thing. So literally, a patient
will come into my office. They'll say,
"I have no reason to live. There's
there's no nothing worth it in life. I
am suicidal. I want to kill myself." So
I have a job as a clinician to like fix
that problem in a very like practical
way. So, I've got, you know, a couple of
weeks, hopefully 15, 20 weeks to teach
them how to find purpose. And so,
usually the way that I approach that is
there's there's a lot of sort of
evidence-based scientific approaches to
finding purpose. I think those tend to
work really well, but I'm I'm sure, as
my philosopher colleagues will will
point out and tear me apart, you know,
science has a lot of shortcomings. And
so then what I I tend to find works
incredibly well is adding a certain
degree of spiritual practice to that.
And usually when we put those two things
together, things work. And the the real
proof point for me was when I started
streaming, 10,000 people reached out to
me in one month asking, hey, like do you
have room in your private practice? And
so I started to think about, okay, if
this is a methodology, then can it be
taught? So, I started this coaching
program and what we found in our pilot
study of,453
people is that if you stick with the
program for about 20 weeks, your sense
of purpose increases by 68%. I'd love to
hear from my colleagues, but I I think,
you know, if someone asks me, "What is
the meaning of life?" I I don't know,
but if someone says, "I have no meaning.
Can you help me with that?" The answer
is absolutely yes.
>> And I want to attempt to just define
two terms that you said there. One is
purpose. And it doesn't have to be a
perfect definition but roughly what you
mean by that. And then you said you
introduced spiritual practice. What did
you mean by that?
>> So what I think about is purpose is
using something called factor analysis.
So if you ask someone do you have
direction in life? Do you have purpose
in life? Is there meaning in life? All
three of those things cluster together
to some.
Even being in control correlates with
that. So if you were in control of your
life, your sense of purpose will
increase. So there are a lot of these
like words that we use but all of these
words tie back to some internal sense of
what is happening in your life. So
that's how I would uh describe purpose
>> in terms of spiritual practices. What my
experience is is that if you look at
human beings who say they have purpose
and human beings who don't have purpose,
their lived experiences in life are
different. So when I work with survivors
of trauma, they have certain experiences
like literally we can scientifically
sort of measure this. You have a
particular experience which destroys
your sense of meaning in the world. I
had a patient once who was attacked in a
bathroom for about 5 minutes. And in 5
minutes this person had a sense of what
they were doing in life, was dating, was
doing well in college, had loving
parents, and in five minutes their
compass for navigating the world was
shattered.
So if we sort of think about experience
can lead to a loss of purpose,
experience can also lead to a gain in
purpose. Now the spiritual tradition
that I come from is all about particular
practices that evoke
certain subjective experiences and as
people have those experiences
their sense of purpose increases and
this is where I think there's a major
shortcoming of science. So science can
tell you what you should do, but it
doesn't create experiences in and of
itself, right? So we can scientifically
understand that the highest risk factor
for pornography addiction is having no
meaning in life. But even if we know
that, that doesn't help us like fix the
problem. Then there's always a question
of how like so we can discover something
with science, but then there's a
question of how do we actually like move
from point A to point B? And that's
where I find spiritual practice is
incredibly helpful. Mhm.
>> Would you classify yourself as religious
>> or or
>> Yes, I think so.
>> Greg,
>> y
>> what is the perspective you bring to
this conversation and what's the the
lived experience, the academia that um
lends itself to that perspective?
>> Yeah, there's a whole bunch of that
fitting in and I relate to a lot what
you're saying uh Alo about people's
challenges. Now what's interesting to me
about this whole discussion since I'm a
Christian uh and I understand the world
from a theistic perspective because I
think it's the best explanation for the
way things are
>> just to give a definition to that um
theistic what does that mean
>> a personal god
>> a god
>> there is a personal god who is involved
with the world he made the world and he
still maintains activity as opposed to
theistic which just wound up the clock
and let it go okay so my view is god is
still involved olved in fact so involved
that he actually came to earth in the
person of Jesus of Nazareth to create a
rescue plan. Now, what's interesting to
me about this broader question, we can
get into more details too, is that it's
not if there is a God who made the world
for a purpose with meaning, people can
participate in that meaning and purpose
even if they don't know God. They're not
they won't be experiencing what they
were made for, which is to be in
friendship with him with the plan that
he's made for their flourishing, but
they still can flourish in some measure
in so far as they touch on these
objective features. But in so far as we
are able even without belief in God to
kind of get in that groove the things
that God made us for the purposes that
he intends in light of being made like
him in some way in his image there's
going to be a measure of satisfaction
but what they'll be missing is is the
ultimate and that is that friendship
with God and being restored in that.
Alex.
>> Yes sir.
>> Same question for you about your what
you bring to this uh conversation in
terms of your perspective, your
experience and maybe some of your sort
of personal journey. Well, for for my
own part, I was quite swept up in the
new atheism movement, uh, which was a
mid2000s publishing phenomenon with the
likes of the Dawkins and the Hitchens of
the world, saying that religion is evil
and terrible. And I think promising an
alternative, a kind of secular humanist
utopia, that if you'll only throw off
these oppressive religious systems, you
will regain your spiritual autonomy and
be able to assert yourself and the
intrinsic meaning that you have within
yourself. People tried that and it
didn't seem to work. And I think that's
because the new atheist movement was
quite philosophically shallow. It didn't
seriously engage with the existential
component of religious belief and why it
exists in the first place. And I think
that is why it exists. I think humans
are in a strange predicament due to the
mystery of consciousness. We find
ourselves possibly uniquely amongst
other animals in the position of being
mortal, being physically embodied, being
in a world, but also knowing those
things. It's one thing to experience the
world. It's one thing to be it's another
thing to be aware that you're
experiencing it. Uh Josh Rasmusen once
said there's a difference between
noticing a tree and noticing that you've
noticed a tree. We have this sort of
second order abstraction that we can do.
So, we know that death is coming, for
example, and death makes a mockery of
everything that we do. Seems to just
obliterate any sense of purpose or
meaning because anything that we're
building will ultimately, as far as
we're concerned, be gone. And that may
well be unique to human beings. And so
I'm not the first to suggest that the
principal motivating factor behind
meaning infused activities that humans
do is an engagement in death denial or
some kind of immortality project. People
literally
for fear of
as a result of the knowledge that this
will all come to an end engage in what
we might call immortality projects. They
engage in things which will outlast
themselves which give them a sense of
escaping this death. The most obvious
example is in religious traditions which
literally promise immortality for your
own soul. But if you look just
practically at where people subjectively
report finding meaning, they find it in
their children. They might find it in
their job, but they're unlikely to find
it in their job if they're doing
something they don't really care about.
They'll find it in their job. Maybe
they're a maybe they're like a barrista
and they find a lot of meaning in
bringing justice into the world because
they're participating in a system which
they believe will outlast them and is
bigger than them. So when people talk
about meaning, we talk about
transcendence, you know, something being
above and beyond their own sort of
material uh situation. And I think
religion is the is is the the archetypal
example of this and I think it's why it
evolves in the first place. There is
this idea that we are living in a
meaning crisis that has cropped up maybe
in the past 100 years or so or maybe in
the last few hundred years or so as a
response to the enlightenment and the
decline of religion. I think that's far
too easy. I think that's way too easy. I
think that if there is such thing as a
meaning crisis, it is literally the
human condition and the reason why these
projects were invented in the first
place. I think literally speaking what
people are doing in religious traditions
is
realizing the finitude of their
existence and therefore trying to
commune with something.
>> Can I add a
>> less finite of course
>> we have this hunger and I I have no
reason to believe that any naturalistic
explanation can explain the
consciousness's
hunger for meaning and significant
because that's all propositional. It's
not molecules in motion.
>> What's naturalistic mean? Naturalistic
just means nature and that's all there
is basically. So you have uh molecules
in motion largely governed by natural
law. There is no outside transcendent
anything. There's no immaterial anything
certainly not an immaterial god that has
started the process and sustains the
process and gives life meaning. There
either is meaning
objectively or not. Okay? If not then
it's up to us. For example, a moment ago
you said that if there is a creator God
who brings us into existence, then you
are designed and you are given purpose
by God. And I think we need to
investigate this a bit further.
>> Mhm.
>> Because for example, a quite sort of
boring and overdone debate at the moment
is the extent to which we are engaged in
the production of potentially
artificially conscious agents with
artificial intelligence technologies.
And there's all this discussion about
whether or not these things can be
conscious like you know whatever. Let's
just suppose for a moment that they
were. Let's suppose that I created an
artificially intelligent machine and I
gave it a purpose and that purpose was
to produce paper clips. And because of
the development of artificial
intelligence technology, it became
conscious in a recognizable sense. It
had an interior sense of self. It sort
of had say feelings or emotions about
the world. But it is just an AI robot
whose entire purpose in life is to make
paper clips.
>> Now I could say that because that AI was
designed by a creator with a purpose
that was explicitly given to it that
that life is meaningful. But I think it
would seem to most people that a life
whose meaning consists in creating paper
clips
is not sufficient is not enough to
address what people really want. It's
not just some kind of purpose. It's not
just even some kind of purpose which is
given to you by an authoritative
creative source. It's something which is
further than that. Yeah. But if I can
just relate this to the question,
>> the problem that arises is that you have
to answer the question of why God
infuses life with the meaning that he
gives it.
>> Mhm. It's either something which he has
sort of arbitrarily plucked up and and
chosen to create in which case we have
this problem of arbitrariness or no or
in fact there is some reason why God had
to give us a particular kind of meaning
that's endemic
>> to the human condition that he had no
choice but for that meaning that more
important kind of meaning to be given to
human life but if he was beholden to
that if he had to give us a particular
kind of meaning it seems like there's a
standard of meaning which exists outside
of God. So I'm not sure in other words
the mechanism by which being created by
someone who says this is your purpose
would be fulfilling in the way that
people want it to be. The reason the
paperclip illustration doesn't match is
because it seems to me that you're
subtly taking the thing that's conscious
that makes paper clips and comparing it
to a human being. And for human beings
who seem to have a different purpose, I
would argue be consigned to make paper
clips, well that's dehumanizing to them.
But if you have, just to follow your
illustration, if you have a creator that
makes something for a reason that the
creator has in mind, then it's
fulfilling its purpose perfectly. You
know, for a human being, that's not
going to be satisfying making paper
clips. And a lot of people who are
making paper clips are not satisfied
with it. Okay? I don't think it's
arbitrary if God is making something for
a purpose. If God decides that he wants
to make creatures to be in friendship
with him because this reflects his
loving character and that purpose is to
be in friendship with him. I don't see
how that is somehow negligible or
arbitrary at all. I guess you could have
said that God could have done otherwise,
but his love and desire for communion is
seem to me an adequate explanation for
that. This is fascinating. Um, so my
first question is what's the point of
this conversation?
>> Yeah. So I think that the ultimate
answer that we're looking for is it
appears that the numbers around purpose
and meaning are fluctuating at this
moment in time. a lot of people are
turning back to religion as as Alex is
we were just chatting about a second ago
and I guess there's two questions which
is one understanding why that's
happening why there's this fluctuation
why we're seeing a mental health crisis
around purpose and meaning and the
second is to try and figure out if
there's a truth one can arrive at if
there's an objective truth that exists.
>> So for y'all I'm curious when y'all show
up here like what is the purpose for
y'all showing up? literally trying to
discover like it's the stated purpose,
right? It's literally just artificially
given purpose by being designed in a
particular way. We're going to get
together and we're going to have a
conversation and see if we can figure
out this this meaning stuff, right? And
by the way, like we're not going to
solve that problem. I think it's worth
pointing out that like these
conversations have to be exploratory and
subjective. If anybody thinks that the
four of us sat at this table are going
to solve the meaning crisis and give
people a five-step guide to finding
meaning in their life and that will be
the sort of case closed, then they're
delusional.
>> I I don't know if I I agree that we
can't find an answer, but we'll talk
about
>> Well, this is what I wanted to speak to.
It it
um obviously we're talking about this
broader issue of meaning and purpose.
All right? And as I mentioned earlier,
there either is an objective one or it's
only subjective. Okay? If it is an
objective one, this is about the most
important thing that anyone could ever
find out about their life if they were
created for a reason. In my view, the
reason I'm here is because I'm convinced
that that's the case and I'm willing to
give reasons why. Okay? But I don't
think I I'm sympathetic to the concern
that you can't sit around a table and in
two or three hours solve the problem for
any individual because people going
through the process of trying to figure
these things out. It takes a long time
as they put the pieces together. But I
think there's a lot of people in the
world that think they have put it
together and they've come to conclusions
about ultimate meaning and purpose and
they don't come to my own conclusions.
But many have. So what I would hate to
do is to leave people with the feeling
like we can all search and the glory is
in the search but if you think you found
the answer then you haven't. Of course
this to me is a nealistic enterprise.
Then I think it's possible to come to
conclusions. Yes,
>> I think so too to be clear. But I think
what I'm what I'm trying to say is this
will be something that one will
experience for themselves and will
discover for themselves in their own
life. It's not going to be something
that you know there's that old um is it
Lynchi the the the sort of the Buddhist
Coan that says if you meet the Buddha
kill him. The idea being that you know
if you think that the kind of
enlightenment which is necessary to
spiritual fulfillment can be found
through some kind of guru um you're
missing the mark. It's something that
you need to do for yourself. But isn't
that statement itself meant to be a
truth about spirituality that you can
actually count on or
>> can I jump in?
>> I just want to make sure I understand
y'all's point. So, so you're saying that
the search for purpose first of all is
never going to go away like is a human
condition, right? Yes. Like like so as
humanity humanity will never find its
purpose.
>> I can tell you why if you like.
>> No. No. I I don't even know why yet.
>> I think I think individuals can but
humanity
>> that's yeah I'm just making sure I
understand. Right. So an individual can
find their purpose but as humanity it's
never going to be solved. And then you
said something about purpose being tied
to
opposing to death in some way. So
transcending death that human beings
basically look for purpose because death
is inevitable and if we can find purpose
then we can give our life meaning. But
if death if we die and I don't leave
something behind. Can you talk a little
bit about that? This is essentially a
version of Ernest Becker's denial of
death hypothesis which famously suggests
that the motivation for a great deal of
human behavior is at least human
behavior outside of immediate sensory
concerns like eating and stuff like
that. Anything that humans engage in on
a societal level, on an abstract level
is ultimately motivated by an
apprehension of death. I think that's
probably too simple, but it's definitely
a contributing factor. I I think that
for example, put it this way, right?
Here's an example that comes from I
think his name is Sheffller and he has
this interesting thought experiment.
Suppose I don't know maybe you're
engaged in in writing a book. Suppose
you discovered and this probably won't
be the case for you because you believe
in an afterlife, but suppose that you're
an atheist for a moment. Suppose it were
the case that you discovered that after
you die, a meteor is going to come and
wipe out all life on Earth. Everybody's
going to die almost instantly after you
do, but you'll be dead. So, you will
live your entire life as it was anyway.
Okay. And suppose the rest of the world
doesn't even know this is going to
happen, but you're told this is going to
be the case. Would that motivate you to
write your book more or less? Most
people say that it would seem a bit
pointless now. I What's the point now in
writing this book? What's the point in
in having children if they're going to
die 30 days after I'm after I'm gone?
What what's the point in in doing any of
these things? What will they still do?
They'll still do the sensory stuff.
They'll still eat. They'll still have
sex. They'll still sleep. This kind of
stuff. But the the typically meaning uh
laden activities of life they would
certainly be demotivated to do. And it's
an interesting thought experiment to
give us some insight as to the fact that
well maybe this means that at least in
part the motivation for these actions in
the first place is that they will extend
beyond our death.
>> I agree with so much of what I'll say
and I also like hard disagree with some
of the fundamentals. So let's say you
have this example of like I'm write a
book and then the world is going to end
30 days later and and so you say because
a lot of what you're talking about is
like what people say right so you'll say
like okay so like people would say that
this is a waste of time and I'm not
going to do it if the world ends in 30
days
>> and you're also saying people
is a is an everlasting thing are
struggling with purpose right you're
saying both of these things
>> so here's my question to you if you tell
someone, you know, you're writing this
book. Let's say you you you write it and
then you die cuz we'll simplify the
example. And then 30 days later, the
world ends. Let's take two people. One
who says, "I'm a write it anyway."
>> And one who says, "There's no point."
>> Which one of those two people do you
think has a greater sense of purpose?
>> Probably the former.
>> Absolutely. So, this is the key thing.
Purpose is absolutely because I I love
that you're asking about mechanisms and
I think maybe that's what I can provide.
I I think that's that's actually the
answer, right? So, it's not that people
believe and I think you're right that
the reason that this is a perennial
problem is because most people do not
live a life where they understand how
purpose works.
>> Mhm.
>> And and what I think is really
fascinating about sort of like this
scientific clinical approach, like if
you ask me, can I help people find
meaning and purpose? I don't know. But
if you ask me, can I help a person? The
answer is absolutely. And we have like
particular scientific things and this is
where it's it's really counterintuitive.
So a big part of like finding purpose is
doing particular things and if you do
those things the likelihood that you
will increase your sense of purpose in
life which is another thing that's very
counterintuitive to people. Purpose is
not binary. It's quantifiable. It's like
a scale. So if I were to ask the three
of y'all right maybe let's like let's do
this not thought experiment but this
practical experiment. Do you know your
purpose in life? Like how confident are
you that you're doing what you're
supposed to be doing in life?
>> How confident am I about the God part or
that I'm doing the things that are
appropriate?
>> That how confident are you that you're
doing what God wants you to do?
>> Well, in that general sense, extremely
confident or else I wouldn't be doing
it.
>> Perfect. Right. So, Stephen, what about
you, bro?
>> About five out of 10.
>> I knew it. Okay. Right. So, Alex,
>> I don't want to be difficult, but I kind
of reject the grammar of the question.
>> Awesome. Reject away, bro. I think it's
what a logician would call an exponable
statement, something which needs to be
broken down. You asked, "Do I know my
own purpose?" That assumes that there is
a purpose to know. It it's a bit like
the comparison I would give is if I
asked you the question, the classic
example in logic is is uh is the king of
France bold? Yes or no?
>> I can I can rephrase my question if you
have problems with my question.
>> So,
do you have a lived experience of
something called purpose? Oh, well,
look, I think purpose is having some
kind of reason to act or be. Yeah. And I
certainly subjectively am motivated to
do things. I think everybody is.
Otherwise, you literally wouldn't be
able to do anything. Um, but it's a bit
foggy to me what psychologically
speaking, on a personal level that
fundamental motivation actually is.
>> Wouldn't purpose be more the the goal
rather than the reason to act, what
you're trying to accomplish?
>> It's a semantic thing, but that's why it
depends what you mean by the word.
>> I'm I'm with you. I'm I'm with you. So,
so, so and I I don't know what I mean
with the word purpose, which is part of
this challenge, but okay. So, so like
I'm just wondering, so like when you So,
a lot of people are motivated to act.
Everyone is motivated to act every day,
right? I get out of bed, I need to take
a dump. Like, but my guess
>> is that if we were to administer
a
scientifically validated instrument that
measures your subjective sense of
purpose, direction in life
>> that that would be north of five out of
10.
>> Okay.
>> Do you think that's fair or is is that
something that you don't
>> maybe? Yeah. I don't know what
>> like do you do you when you wake up, do
you feel like you're know you know what
you want to do and what's going on and
you're like doing good work? Like I'm
asking about the subjective
>> not on a grand sense. I'm quite
agnostic. I mean I'm sort of
>> I'm not talking about it. Okay. Maybe
>> it depend. I I really don't know what
you mean.
>> No. Perfect. Okay. So so so not on a
grand sense but on some other sense.
>> Sure. Okay. Great.
>> So I think that this is like this is I I
think this is beautiful because I think
what we have here is like not on a grand
sense. So I think on a grand sense
you're there, right? But you're
absolutely motivated by particular
things. So I think this is the first
thing about purpose. Can I a
clarification real quickly? Yeah. On a
grand sense, yes. But there are
distinctions that you were referring to
a few moments ago, right? There are a
lot of things that are dissatisfying my
life. But in terms of being on the right
course, that's part of what life is.
Being on the right course, lots of crazy
stuff that's happening in between.
>> Cool. So like like the first thing that
I've kind of noticed in my work is that
I don't know whether a grander purpose
exists or not. I I think that's a lovely
discussion that I want to continue to
have with you, but I I I'm sort of
here's where I'm sort of coming from in
this discussion.
>> Stephen started this out with some
really scary statistics that we're
seeing, right? There's a mental health
crisis. I think a lot of what we're
seeing is is while it may be perennial,
I think it's like seems more acute right
now. Maybe that's because of the atheist
materialism, whatever. I'm I'm not quite
sure, but this is a problem. So, just
sharing where I'm coming from. My hope
is that someone who is watching this
will have moved forward some vague
percentage points. I'm shooting for
about 20% in their personal quest for
purpose.
>> And I think a big part of what I'm going
to try to contribute here today is my
understanding of like how to do that.
That this is a quantifiable thing that
we can sort of see at this table.
>> People are sort of like at different
places.
And so the first thing that I kind of
want to point out is I don't know
whether there's purpose or not, but as a
human condition,
there is something that each of us feel
or experience that gives us an answer,
right? So you're like at 10, but what
that means is that you something is
going on in your mind, something is
going on in your heart, something is
going on in your body where you wake up
and you feel like you have purpose.
Steven wakes up and he's like at a five
out of 10. So, he's getting some signals
in that area. Some signals are not in
that area. You have some signals in that
direction, too. You know why you're
showing up at this podcast. You you've
got a book that you're working on.
Awesome. Can't wait to read it. And
>> but on a grander sense, you're like, I
don't know about this like objective
stuff or whatever. So, this is sort of
like this quantifiable thing.
>> And you
>> um I'm going to let you all guess.
>> Where would you put me out?
>> I don't like to psychize people.
>> It's okay if you don't like to, will
you?
>> I mean, I don't I just met you. I don't
I don't know. I have no idea what what
sense of meaning you you have in your
life.
>> Mhm.
>> Okay. I mean, for me, I I'm just
motivated to try and find out.
>> So, I think I think the audience can
guess, too.
>> Yeah. I would say you're pretty high.
That's why you're here. That's why
you're articulating your ideas.
>> Probably probably closer to 10 than
five.
>> Mhm.
>> Yeah.
>> Right. So, so it's like it's okay if you
don't want to do that because I'm
guessing that there are certain things
in your intellect that tell you. So, do
you have a subjective instinct?
>> No, I just don't know you that well. I I
I mean, I don't know. Okay. And also, it
depends what you mean, right? Because
you'll say that you have a if you say
that you're a 10, like we you have this
this there's this you use the phrase
earlier sense a sense of meaning in
life. because you're talking about this
from an empirical standpoint of whether
people report having a sense of meaning.
Whereas I think that Greg is probably
talking about literally speaking whether
there is actually in fact a real meaning
whether or not people sense it or not.
You could say that you have a 10 out of
10 and Greg could say well that's it's
great that you feel that way but it's
misguided because the purpose that you
have identified in your life is the
wrong one. And so to me the important
question is not so much whether you
subjectively report feeling like you
have purpose in life but whether that
purpose is grounded in something real
and true.
>> Yeah. So I think that your answer right
now is the reason why you think some of
these questions are unanswerable.
>> Mhm.
>> So I think if you adopt that frame
you'll never know. But
>> I don't think they're unanswerable.
>> Okay. Let let me let me just finish.
Okay. So my first uh experience of this
right is that first of all there is a
subjective barometer like how do we know
whether we have purpose maybe we listen
to other people but there is some sort
of internal sense of this and this is
where the science becomes really
important because if you look at people
who have like a history of trauma or
something what you tend to find is that
there are certain like neurobiological
things that can happen to you that will
literally affect the parts of your brain
that are able to detect purpose.
So this is sort of like a subjective
experience and I think the way that and
I I love your emphasis on mechanism and
I think this is what in my opinion
science and spirituality can really add
is they add the how right they they add
like why is it that one person has
purpose and another person doesn't have
purpose. So first thing is that in my
experience in the way that I operate,
I'm not saying it's correct. It's just
it's effective in terms of helping
people move the needle on reducing
suicidality,
uh improving resilience, giving them a
reason to wake up in the morning. Like
it tends to work. Um and it's not just
me, it's that there's a bunch of, you
know, methodologies that we have in
psychotherapy and stuff like that that
accomplish these kinds of things that
there's some internal sense of purpose.
Now what I think uh surprises a lot of
people is that there are two ways that
you increase that sense of purpose. The
first is a bucket of things that are
kind of counter counterintuitive. And
this is where we also have to understand
that purpose
correlates with certain other things in
life. So if I feel like I am in control
of my life
then my sense of purpose will increase.
Those two things are correlated. It's
not clear whether it's one thing that
manifests in two ways or it's probably
two discreet things because there's some
subtlety there. But just as a very
simple example, if you take someone who
feels out of control in life and you
help them get control of their life, and
there's a really great example of this,
which is something called passive
challenges versus active challenges. So,
there's a fascinating research on
anxiety that shows that if you're
someone in life whose life is happening
to you, like you wake up one day and
then like your your boss wants you to
come in for work and you have to pay
rent at the end of the month and like
you're you're logging on to Tinder and
people aren't responding to you. Life is
controlling the direction that you move.
And people feel overwhelmed by this and
they want freedom. They want control.
What they end up doing is they they they
wish that they didn't have these things.
So they run away from these problems. So
passive challenges are challenges that
life imposes upon you that you didn't
sign up for.
Then there's something really
fascinating which is your sense of
control in life does not correlate just
with the passive challenges. It
correlates with the ratio of passive
challenges to active challenges. Active
challenges are things that you choose to
do that are difficult. So this is really
fascinating. But if if you're getting
bodied by life in three different
directions, the solution to that is not
run away from those problems. It's
actually to wake up and start to push
yourself in a particular direction. I
want to do this instead. If you want to
learn how to like read uh, you know,
learn philosophy, you know, start
studying philosophical texts, you know,
like is you start to take on more, which
is very counterintuitive because when
most people feel feel overwhelmed, they
don't feel like they can do more. The
exact solution is to take on more active
challenges. then you have some sense of
control in life. And once your ratio of
active challenges to passive challenges
is more evened out, this does something
really cool. It gives you a sense that
I'm no longer out of control.
>> Mhm.
>> Once you feel like you're no longer out
of control, this is the really cool
thing. Then your capacity to deal with
the stuff that life throws at you
actually improves. Mhm.
>> So there's this, this is just one
example of like one scientific
neurobiological principle that has some
psychology associated with where you can
do particular things
>> to give yourself a sense of direction in
life.
>> Now some of the stuff around worship and
spiritual practice that can do it too.
Um but I think that usually what I tend
to see is that you know if someone is
lost in life you can sort of answer it
by these big questions. you can sort of
think about this sort of transcendental
purpose which I'm I'm happy to talk
about. But I think there's a lot of like
little stuff that you can do.
>> Yeah.
>> And as you implement these things, the
sense of purpose in your life, your
internal lived experience of feeling out
of out of control will change.
>> Let let me offer a few thoughts if I
could. One I want to speak to something
that you've said, Alex, um that I just
want to offer a caution about. When we
talk about motivation, the motivation
for something, we sometimes confuse that
with justification. So someone might say
to me as an atheist, for example, well,
you're a Christian because you were born
in America. If you were born in Saudi
Arabia, you wouldn't be a Christian.
You'd be a Muslim. Of course, that's
irrelevant to the question whether Islam
or Christianity or some other religion
is true. It doesn't speak to that. It
speaks to psychology. Okay? And the fact
is, if the atheist was born in Saudi
Arabia, he wouldn't be an atheist
either. likely the key question isn't
what motivates people for example to
think about purpose death maybe a fear
of death that might be a motivation the
question is whether the place they land
in answering the question has any
objective truth to it or not it could be
that there is a god and that there is an
afterlife and facing death does give
comfort to that uh I should say when
facing death you have comfort because
there is a god and there's something
that you're going to it's closer
communion with him Okay, just because
you're motivated by death doesn't mean
that your belief about the afterlife is
somehow an error.
>> I just wanted to just to add something
in here. So, I I think part of the
reason I've also convened um you guys to
have this conversation today is because
I've got several people in my life that
are I can I can literally lay out the
personas, but I've got one particular
friend who's 35 between 35 and 40 years
old, living in Dubai, living in a a
glass box um freelancer. So he wakes up
in the morning, his bed is there, he
then works there, then goes back to bed.
He's single, no kids in his life at the
moment, he said to me that he can't get
out of bed anymore, he feels stuck. And
then about 6 months after, out of the
blue, it turns out, without telling any
of us, and we're his best friends, he's
flown to America. He's been baptized.
He's a Christian. Suddenly, his life has
purpose and meaning again. He's a
completely different person. And this
individual, never, ever, he would be the
last person that you'd think would be
religious. got another friend, female,
just over 30 years old, doesn't have
kids, freelance, works at home. Um, when
I asked her what her meaning and purpose
in life, she said to me she wants to get
to having 200 plants, plants she can
water. She names all of them.
>> She then told me a week after she's in
therapy because she feels lost and stuck
in life. And so much of the central
point why I've been motivated to have
this conversation is it appears to me
and I haven't nailed this hypothesis yet
that freedom, independence, be your own
boss. The decline in people having
children, the glamorization of um as you
said at the very beginning like you know
do it yourself, do it your way is
failing people in some way
>> and that actually the push for
independence was in some way some kind
of light. I actually also went through
the same new atheist
>> baptism that you went through and I read
all those books at 18 years old and two
years I was I was debating dog walkers
on the street about God. I was so such a
staunch atheist but I now find myself in
a position where
>> I'm almost back to being curious again
>> because it feels like independence
wasn't the answer.
>> Just wanted to refrain curious I think.
Yeah. I mean I think people need tasks.
I think that purpose is intimately tied
up with the idea of of task to fulfill.
It's why people tend to find meaning in
projects which are not completed yet. In
fact, Pascal writes quite compellingly
about this when he writes about boredom
and he imagines a a gambler, someone who
who enjoys gambling and says, well, why
is this person gambling? Because they're
doing this thing with the with the
chance of winning some money. Okay, so
why don't you just give them the money?
just take the gambler and give him all
the money that he could possibly receive
without playing the game and he won't be
very fulfilled even though he's getting
ostensibly what he was trying to get.
No, no, that wouldn't be fulfilling
because he enjoys the the gambling.
Okay, says Pascal. Then let him play the
game, but make it such that he'll never
actually win the money, but he he gets
to keep playing the game and he's not
going to be very fulfilled by that
either. That's also going to be
completely pointless. And so Pascal
noticed that what you kind of need to
avoid boredom and I suppose to to imbue
your life with with purpose at least in
this analogy is
some kind of task to fulfill
that you haven't fulfilled yet that you
don't know if you're going to fulfill
that you believe will bring you
fulfillment when you get it but you
haven't got it yet. It's why I think
religion does it really well because
it's the definition of something which
you don't have now which you can strive
for which when you get you believe will
be uh will be fulfilling.
>> So so so I I love these examples because
actually we know exactly what's going on
in that thought experiment. Right? So
now there have been there's so many
advances in neuroscience that we
understand why people gamble. Right? So,
we understand that giving someone money
will satisfy a gambler in one of two
cases. And I've seen this. I've worked
with people who are professional poker
players. Some people there, what we
describe motivation is actually like a
dozen different things going on in your
brain. So, if you were a professional
poker player and poker and I've
literally worked with professional poker
players who had no meaning in life. It's
so funny. I'm thinking about a
particular person and then you know
achieved a certain financial goal.
That's why they play poker. So if your
motivation is that I'm playing poker
because I'm I have a skill that I'm
using to get money.
>> Yeah.
>> If that is your internal motivation,
that is going to come from certain
circuits in your brain. It's going to
come from places like your frontal lobe.
Now, as Pascal pointed out, if you give
the average person who gamles money,
what are they going to do with it?
They're going to gamble more, right? So
that means that the their motivation is
coming from something more closer to the
nucleus incumbent, a random
reinforcement schedule. Maybe they're
trying to suppress amydala emotions. So
we actually can like look at that
example and we can understand why each
of those things happens. And then the
most beautiful thing is that there is
absolutely
a scenario where someone can gamble and
never win and they can absolutely have
purpose. So this is where I know that
sounds insane but if you look at some of
these things from the Zen tradition,
right? So these are practices that have
no purpose to act with no meaning
whatsoever. And the beautiful thing
about that is as you explore that sort
of angle and there's sort of a
neuroscience
perspective to this as well is that if
you really think about it you're saying
okay so people invest in this purpose or
in this purpose-seeking thing like
religion with the idea that I'll find
payoff at the end. Is that what you were
saying earlier?
>> I'm saying something a bit different. I
what I was going to go on to say is to
is to point out that and bear in mind
this comes from a part of of Pascal's
pon which is titled man without god. You
know he goes on to discuss man with god.
Um but I look at the development of the
human species and our particular
proclivities. Lewis makes this argument
from desire that you mentioned. Why do
we have a desire for food? Well because
there is actually food to have. The
evolutionary biologist says the reason
that we develop hunger is because those
who didn't died. And if you don't have
some sense of hunger, you're not going
to seek out food and you will die. And
so it just so happens that those who
develop this feeling of hunger will be
more likely to survive. And therefore
hunger is a part of our human condition.
Well, such is meaning. If you have two
isolated communities, one of whom says,
"I just don't care. Whatever, man. No
interest in having children, no
interested in building societies, legal
systems, constitutions, whatever the
case. Moral systems, none of they just
don't care. nihilists, they're not even
gonna have children. That society will
die out. Another society which just so
happens to perhaps delusion like in a in
an exercise of delusion just develop
this inexplicable feeling.
>> And of course, this evolves over time
and starts with essentially the kind of
random mutation of ideas that works on
the genetic level in evolution. They
call it mmetics when it's ideas rather
than genes. the society which just ends
up developing this idea that actually I
can't quite explain why but I I just
have this drive towards building a
society and engaging in legal justice
and moral systems and kind of they're
just more likely to survive. So we end
up with this with this sense this this
drive within us that we can't explain
and yet we have. So imagine for the
majority of our evolutionary history
what it was like every single day you
woke up and you did not know if you were
going to have a roof over your head. You
didn't know if you were going to have
food to eat. You had to go out and you
had to hunt it. You had to go and find
it. Every single day the game reset. And
so I would imagine that those lives were
probably quite meaningful. At least in
the sense that I don't think there would
have been many existential crisises on a
dayto-day because the purpose was quite
clear. And like Pascal's gambler, they
had a task that they think will fulfill
them when they get it and they don't
know whether it's going to be fulfilled.
So what's happened today?
Well, now we've been given the money
without the game. We've got houses,
we've got food, we can go next door and
get some water, get some food from all
over the all over the planet, you know,
like that's that's it that you've got
the money without the game. So what do
people do in the modern situation when
they find that their life is a bit
meaningless? They start intentionally
doing things which are difficult. They
start doing ice baths. They start
exercising. They start going into a room
just to physically exert themselves in
order to sort of build muscle and
whatnot like on purpose for its own
sake. Why? Because today we've got the
money without the game. So people are
going out and seeking the game without
the money. They're going and doing the
ice baths in the gym. Whereas the truly
meaningful life is one in which you are
playing the game in the service of
getting the goal. That is why I think
that you know literally just seeking out
those things I think that there's a
reason why they have a psychological
impact. It's not as simple as just like
oh well if you go to the gym you know it
it releases endorphins and and makes you
feel good. It's like let's think a bit
deeper than that. what's actually going
on. People are seeking out the game
without without the money. Crucially,
I've talked about this as as a
deathdenying pursuit, right? The idea
that the things that you engage in here,
at least in terms of grand projects like
religion and society, are even if just
subconsciously an exercise in the denial
of death. What would that mean? It means
that if you encounter other communities,
if you encounter other traditions who
just just by their mere existence
threatens the truth of your claims,
those traditions subconsciously
represent death. They represent
nihilism. So what happens in a society
that develops the kind of
telecommunication technology whereby
every single day you open your phone and
you are addicted to a process of
scrolling through every seven seconds a
new person with new ideas with different
beliefs from all over the world. Do you
think that might have something to do
with the meaning crisis that we find
ourselves in? We're told that what's
happened is that people stop believing
in God and now they're all depressed and
upset and nihilistic. That's far too
simple. You don't think it might have
something to do with the fundamentally
revolutionary
change to our society that has been
brought about specifically by
telecommunication by the ability to
oftenimes unintentionally and
non-consensually be confronted with
traditions and people from halfway
across the world that just remind you
every single day zing zing zing every
single day that your truth is not the
only truth. that the transcendence that
you've placed your trust in is
completely subjective and personal and
that someone over there
>> believes something totally different and
seems to be living just the same kind of
happy life.
>> That I think is why people are
struggling so much. It's not just
because they're atheists. Now
>> I have a lot to say about this. I'll try
to keep it compact. By the way, just
we're aware of all kinds of different
options for us spiritually. Yes. um that
doesn't necessarily suggest that none of
the options are actually accurate or
that are okay. So making an implication
there and this is what creates kind of
the angst because all we have is our own
personal subjective point of view.
>> I think that's why people experience
that. Now of course as a matter of truth
you could say for example yourself you
could say yes I'm constantly confronted
by different religious traditions but I
believe that Christianity is true. who I
think has the best evidence.
>> This is even true in even in the
scientific realm. You're all kinds of
different ideas, but no one wants to say
just because there are so many different
ideas to explain things that nobody can
be correct
>> which is why what I'm saying is is
insensitive to the truth or falsity of
any of the traditions. What I'm saying
is
>> okay that's good because I want to go to
that next
>> as an explanation as for the the
psychological
>> phenomenon the the the literal feeling
that people have because likewise you
would say that there is a meaning crisis
maybe you would say that lots of people
the statistics we just heard you would
say lots of people you know don't feel
meaning in their life and you'd want to
offer an explanation for why that's the
case you think their lives are
meaningful right you think that all of
those people who say my life has no
meaning they're wrong their lives
actually do have meaning
>> is that what you think
>> well this was the subject objective
response. They feel like they don't have
meaning,
>> but they were made for a purpose. If
they're not in in touch with that
meaning and purpose, then they're going
to feel bereft.
>> They believe there really is a purpose
for their life, but subjectively they
haven't either found it or they don't
feel it. What I'm doing is I'm offering
a psychological explanation for why they
don't feel it, which is completely
insensitive to whether or not there's a
truth of the matter.
>> I'm so glad you put it that way. Uh
because this is exactly my point. I
don't want anybody to miss it. We're
really offering two different pictures
of reality here. Okay. People have to
ask themselves two questions, I think.
One is they reflect on their own
personal awareness
of the need for meaning and
significance.
>> Does it seem to them that this is just a
psychological thing that people can
satisfy in all kinds of different ways
depending on the individual or does it
seem to them I'm asking these questions
because I suspect there is a truth about
life that might be discovered. Okay,
that's the first question. And that and
I think most people's awareness of this
is that there's something transcendent,
something bigger than them. Okay, and
any kind of naturalistic explanation is
not going to ultimately satisfy that.
The other thing is is there any reason
to believe that there is a transcendent
reality that God exists that souls exist
that that there is an objective morality
that guides our life and if we're living
virtuously that's going to be satisfying
even if we don't believe in God or not.
Those are the two things at stake here,
you know. And now this description, the
story of reality I just described that I
hold to it seems to me completely
coherent. Maybe not true, but it
certainly is coherent that if there is a
God who made us for himself and places
eternity in our hearts, that we're going
to yearn for that and made the way for
us to live and then we're going to find
good ways to live as opposed to
unsatisfying ways to live. That makes
sense. Doesn't make any sense to me at
all to say that my molecules are moving
in a certain way to create in my
conscious mind, which Darwinism would
cannot offer an explanation for. It
hasn't. That's why Daniel Dennett said
consciousness is an illusion, you know,
because he couldn't do anything with it.
Thomas Nagel wrote his book Mind the
Cosmos. You're familiar with this, I'm
sure. You know, why the Neodyarian
materialistic view of the world is
almost certainly false. And he's an
atheist for goodness sake, because he
can't explain consciousness, not in a
Darwinian way. So how is it that this
mystery of consciousness which contains
propositional thoughts, ideas and
purposes,
>> if consciousness can't be explained at
Darwinian way, how can some
characterization of molecules in motion
>> accomplish that same end? That's my
concern. This is why I'm not convinced
about at all about the naturalist one
and this one seems so much more
plausible.
>> What you're raising is the is the
problem of consciousness which is I
think a new question but an important
one. I wanted to point out earlier that
that when I gave an explanation as to
why people feel a lack of meaning and
you said that has no bearing on truth. I
think that's
>> you admitted that too at the end there.
I appreciate that.
>> I don't admit it. I I assert it. Of
course that's the case. In
>> affirmed you weren't making the case
>> in the same way that if somebody says
that like if you're a Christian and you
say the reason everyone's so depressed
is because society has become atheistic.
Somebody could say well yeah I mean that
might be the case but that doesn't mean
atheism is false. It might be that it is
true and just depressing. Right? Of
course, like the the question if we're
discussing
>> there are alternate explanations.
>> If you want to know why somebody feels a
particular way psychologically, you can
offer an explanation which has
absolutely nothing to do with the truth
or falsity of a worldview. You can then
separately discuss the truth or falsity
of a worldview which you've then gone on
to do with specific reference to the
problem of consciousness.
>> It thinks it has absolutely nothing or
it can be experienced apart from the
issue of worldview. I'm saying that if
you're if you're literally just trying I
mean if the question I'm asked is why do
people perceive a lack of meaning in
their life that's just a question about
their psychological constitution that's
just that's literally a question about
why they feel a particular way
>> so if a person was a total nealist
didn't believe in anything uh was
important and then they were depressed
and even suicidal would you say there
wasn't a link between that worldview and
their feelings
>> yes there is but what I'm saying is that
the link between that worldview and
their feeling has nothing to do with the
truth of the Okay, you see what I'm
saying? It doesn't nihilism can be true.
Nihilism can be false. Nihilism can be
an in unintelligible concept. It can
still be the case that that person's
conviction is making them depressed.
Right? In the same way that somebody
could be be a Christian and that makes
them really happy. That doesn't mean
Christianity is true. Someone can become
a Christian and become really depressed.
That doesn't mean that Christianity is
false. What I'm trying to point out is
it is just trivially true.
>> So So I I still want to try to
understand a little bit about what
you're saying.
>> Okay.
>> Because I don't fully follow.
>> Fine. Um, and I think that the reason
I'm I feel way more confident in what
you're saying is because
>> Christ is pulling at your
>> 100%. Yeah.
>> So, so I think Christ we both talk to
Christ. So, like we're good on that.
Like I I know where he's coming from.
So, couple of things that I'm
>> I talk to Christ too, you know.
>> Awesome. Does he talk back?
>> He does not talk back. And
>> yeah, that's that's tricky. We can talk
about how how to get you there.
>> One person said just read the gospels
aloud.
>> So So
>> I've done that a few times. So, a couple
of things that I'm I'm curious about.
One is so I'm noticing that you're I'm
trying to understand where so I I love
the way you're sallying forth
>> to grapple with this problem of purpose.
You do a beautiful job of sort of
talking about like okay what's the truth
>> and then there's this psychological
perspective and I I want to just try to
understand this. So, are you of the mind
that from a psychological perspective,
you can wake up one day and feel like
you have purpose, but that doesn't
necessarily talk about purpose
transcendentally.
>> Capital P.
>> I'm saying that doesn't talk about the
truth of your belief. The
>> Okay.
>> So, for example, you could you could you
could believe that your children are
about to die
>> and that suddenly your life feels really
meaningless and and really purposeless.
It could be completely false. You could
have been like misled. Someone could lie
to you. But like what I'm saying is is
the psychological explanation for why
you feel a particular way has nothing to
do with the truth of the thing that you
believe that's making you feel that way.
>> Gotcha. Okay. So what I'm curious about
is when you are exploring purpose
>> are you exploring it from are you trying
to find the answer at the top like what
is the truth of purpose or are you
focused on the subjective
experience of purpose?
>> Depends on the context. If you're asking
I mean we were talking literally about a
psychological explanation for why people
feel a particular way you know is it due
to a decline in religion that kind of
stuff in that case it's subjective it's
individuals yeah
>> yeah so so
do you think that the top one can be
answered
>> what the top one is in like there being
>> they're being purpose right so that's
not subjective at all
>> so what does that mean there being
purpose because for me that looks like
some kind of reason to act or to be that
is not contingent on some other fact.
Just to be clear, to make it clear for
the listener, I think you hear what I'm
saying. But like suppose you woke up and
you were a Christian and that brought
you meaning. What I'm saying is that
subjective sense of meaning that you get
from Christianity has no bearing on the
truth or falsity of Christianity.
>> Gotcha. Right. Right. So, so what I'm
curious about is in your opinion, and if
you don't have one, that's totally fine.
um you know do you think that so sure
there's a subjective experience which
doesn't speak to truth right it's just a
subjective experience do you think that
there is some way to grapple with that
truth
>> well the truth of Christianity or
something
>> the truth the truth of of purpose
>> but we're shifting here right because
what I'm saying is
>> let let me shift then I don't want to do
that so then I'm gonna go back
>> this is why I maybe I'm not
understanding your question what all I
am saying yeah is that if you feel if
you feel a subjective sense of purpose
from proposition P
like the fact that you feel purpose from
that does not have any proposition P and
then you just ask but but is there a way
to discuss whether P is true
>> well yeah like so if proposition P is
Christianity then yeah we can talk about
the historical argument for the
resurrection of Jesus or something
gotcha gotcha okay I'm not I'm not
trying to reach into some yeah
>> mystical capital P purpose realm
>> gotcha so right so and I I think that's
so helpful thank you so
Okay. Okay. So,
that's really helpful for me because
then you I want to go back to something
you said earlier about, you know, cell
phones and we're scrolling on cell
phones and things like that and we have
this like like this worldview and then
if we encounter a worldview that is
different from ours that could put us
into some form of crisis or difficulty
and we're getting bombarded by all of
these things.
>> And so what that means is that the
individual when they wake up in the
morning and they scroll through their
phone, right? We're not talking about
whether the proposition P is true or
not. Their subjective experiences like I
have no meaning and I have no purpose in
life,
>> right? And and so you posited one
mechanism which I think is a completely
valid mechanism is a philosophical
mechanism, but we have a lot of
neuroscience mechanisms that support
what you're saying. So just and this is
where I I I think that we kind of I'm
going to sort of restate that what my
experience of this stuff has been
because I'm I'm not a philosopher is I I
don't really know too well how to
contend with whether proposition P is
true or not. That's why I was asking and
and it's not that you weren't being
clear, it's that I'm just ignorant of
how philosophy works.
>> Um and so that's why I was kind of
asking like you know can you do that?
Mh.
>> So that's where also where like I'm kind
of coming from is that we have this
crisis that has high suicidality, high
addiction rates. People left the church
in big ways. And then we're sort of left
with like, okay, how do we navigate
this? And that's where I think if we
look at a lot of this, the influences
on society, we see that there's profound
neurological influences. And what I sort
of found is when I was working
especially with like patients with
trauma that there is a set of things
that is happening in the world around
them that induce certain changes to
their how they experience the world. So
a really good example of this is if you
want to find your purpose in life you
should reduce your level of alexathyia.
So alexathyia is the inability to tell
what you you're emotionally feeling.
Mhm.
>> And if we look at the influence of
things like cell phones, what they're
doing is they're suppressing the parts
of our brain that have that experience
negative emotions. Sometimes they
provoke negative emotions, sometimes
they suppress negative emotions. And so
if you start to
be able to feel more, right? So the this
is literally shutting down the parts of
our brain that h that give us an
internal sense of what we feel. And so
as you shut down your ability to detect
what you are feeling on the inside that
correlates with your not having a
detection of purpose on the inside. So I
think that you know this is you you
asked the question why is this
happening? I think we're disabling and I
was working with people with trauma and
and sort of sort of figured out a
sequence of things that is based on the
literature that involves things like
reducing your alexathyia. Another big
part is managing your ego. So I think
this relationship with God thing is a
really really really great example of
like if you ask what is the mechanism of
a relationship with God. So we as human
beings tend to be like I'm here but then
as you relate to other people around you
your sense of identity changes and when
you relate to something that is
transcendent I know that that's a scary
word and I don't know exactly what that
word means but as you relate to
something that is really big up here
that has noticeable effects on your
default mode network your sense of self.
And as your default mode network longer
becomes hyperactive, the more
hyperactive your default mode network
is, the more likely I think you are to
be like nihilistic, to have a
pessimistic worldview, as we start to
make those changes, then people start to
feel a sense of purpose. They start to
feel a sense of connection. And then the
last kind of really interesting data
which we can go into is psychedelics
which is really really fascinating
because this allows us to test
subjective experience and the effect of
subject subjective experience on a
person.
>> Is this an opportunity please?
>> I'm just concerned that you might have
overstated something maybe reflecting
back something you thought I was saying
and I was making the case about the
genetic fallacy and just because a
person has a motivation to believe
something doesn't necessarily mean that
that thing is true or have a subjective
experience. I think it goes a little
further than that though. Uh if you went
to the doctor and you weren't feeling
well and the doctor gave you a pill and
then you went home and you took the pill
then you felt better. I think it would
be appropriate for you to say, "Well,
that pill, taking that pill, going to
that doctor had something to do with my
experience that I'm having right now."
>> Oh yeah. I think this is why I think it
might have intent unintentionally been
an overstatement on your part because I
think
>> just like your friend Stephen who in
Dubai all of a sudden became a Christian
and everything changed. Okay.
>> Um,
>> well, the you you I guess you could say
the change of life isn't maybe
knockdown, dragged down proof that what
he believes now is actually true. Big P,
big T.
>> That like Jesus rose from the dead.
>> It seems to be, pardon me,
>> that like Jesus rose from the dead. It's
got no bearing on whether that's true or
not.
>> Well, I'm speaking of a different thing
right now. I'm thinking about the
experience now with God that he's
having.
>> If you if he's having this changed life,
this this is evidential. This is this
lends credibility to the belief system
that he's now adopted because it created
this particular significant change in
his life. It may not be proof and that
word is really
an oozy goosey word how to pin down but
nevertheless it still seems to be
evidential. It is it it speaks to the
legitimacy and accuracy and truthfulness
of the belief system that produced this
change life. That's what I'm saying.
It's only evidence that belief in that
thing makes someone feel more fulfilled.
That's the only thing it's evidence of.
>> Okay. So, this is where we differ. Just
like
>> I'm with him on this one.
>> Okay. Just because uh just because a
certain you're saying just because they
believe it, this makes them better. It
doesn't mean that the belief is actually
sound.
>> Greg, I've got a good way of coming at
this then. So,
>> this is where we differ. That's right.
If I had five friends and they all
picked five different religions and they
all felt the same thing that my friend
did in Dubai where they all felt better
for it. Does is that evidential that all
five religions are true?
>> Well, see, I don't actually think it
works that way. You can speculate and
say and offer that illustration. Um, but
I don't think it actually works that
way. I I think that universally the
experience of Christians is very very
>> uh quantifiable
in terms of transformed lives and this
is one of the reasons that these
transformed lives lend credibility to
the belief system itself.
>> So in that scenario where one of my
friends turns to Islam, one of my
friends turns to Christianity etc etc.
The only experience that's evidential of
truth is the Christians. Well, I think
you have to look at every individual
thing. All right? And um
here's my suspicion, and I haven't
quantified this across the board. All
right? Different people have different
experiences by engaging different
religious uh belief traditions,
whatever. But in so far as anybody's
life is significantly altered by that
thing, this to me is evidence that
something is going on here than merely
the belief. If it's just the belief,
you're back to uh to marks again and the
opiate of the people, you know, that
would be Carl, not Groucho, although
that's not anybody knows who those two
people are anymore. It sounds as though,
you know, if if I if I lied to somebody
in a cruel prank and I told them that
say say they're really struggling with
money, they're really really suffering
for it and they feel and they have these
psychological effects of feeling that
life is meaningless. They want to kill
themselves, whatever it is, cuz they
just they cannot keep living and I tell
them, "Good news. Um, you've won the
lottery. You've won a million pounds."
And suddenly the weight is lifted. The
joy is brought. Of course, money isn't
sufficient for bringing about meaning in
life, but this person is
>> But I've lied to them. Like the the fact
that they feel this immense sense of
meaning from a belief that they've
adopted has it bears absolutely no
evidence.
>> No, in that case whether it's true that
they've won a million pounds.
>> I'm just saying that to divorce all
results from belief systems is a
mistake. There can be a there can be a
connection there. Just because you can
mislead somebody by telling them a lie
and they can experience something
emotionally doesn't mean that the other
person who's experiencing something
transcendent in their emotions. And by
the way for Christians it's not just a
high because Christianity is not a
continuous high. Even people who are
suffering terribly as Christians in
persecution read Fox's books of martyrs
book of martyrs still have this strong
sense of value, purpose and security.
Even so, I'm just saying there's an
evidential relationship between those.
It's not enough to just simply dismiss
it because you can tell a lie and
someone could have the same kind of
feeling.
>> I'm even happy to say that like I don't
know if this is true, but suppose it
were just the case that only
Christianity brought about this positive
effect. Suppose we just discovered that
everybody who claimed to feel meaning,
it would just didn't compare.
>> That's not what I'm saying.
>> But suppose that were the case. Even if
there was something really special about
Christianity that gave some evidential
credence to something specific about
Christianity that's true about
Christianity that it particularly
infuses life with meaning. I still think
it just has nothing to do with the truth
of Christianity as a worldview.
>> I mean, Christianity hinges on the
historical fact of the resurrection of
Jesus. Right. Correct. And so the best
way of explaining this is to say that if
if your friend from Dubai starts going
to church and they start feeling really
like meaning like start experiencing a
lot of meaning in their life that has
absolutely no evidential bearing on
whether Jesus rose from the dead. And if
Christianity as a proposition
essentially is the resurrection of Jesus
and this feeling that your friend had
has no evidential bearing on the
resurrection of Jesus then the feeling
that your friend had had no evidential
bearing on Christianity. Well, it turns
out that Christianity has multiple
factors of of uh support and evidence.
Crucial obviously the crux one might say
is the resurrection of Christ, the death
and resurrection because of the
theological significance of that is in
the whole system. All right? But there
are lots of other things too that have
bearing and actually I think there are
people who have become who have become
Christians without having a robust
understanding even of the resurrection
or that. So um it's even though
theologically that is the crux I agree
um it doesn't mean that for subjectively
every person who enters in a
relationship with Christ has all of that
in place immediately.
>> I'm really interested to understand for
my friend in Dubai
>> Yeah.
>> If he came to you and he was your friend
in Dubai
>> and he said my life is lacking meaning
>> I can't get out of bed anymore.
>> What would you prescribe him? What would
you recommend? What would you suggest
as he's your friend?
It's hard to know without knowing that
friend, but if it seemed to me like
going to church or reading the gospels
might provide that for him, then I'd
probably recommend that he did that. But
I think that literally the subjective
feeling of meaning is is usually tied up
in the identification of something that
transcends your individual self.
>> Yeah. Why would you? I think any
whatever is the most plausible course of
action for that person to engage in
something like that would be what I
would recommend for them. If they're
maybe that maybe they're not
particularly interested in religion, I'd
recommend that they read some philosophy
of mind and try to understand the nature
of consciousness. And they might start I
might recommend depending on who they
are that they take a psychedelic drug
and try to experience something which
cannot be put into words because a lot
of the time when you experience
something like an ego death and you
might realize that the the individuated
self is an illusion and that these
cliches that keep cropping up when
someone does psychedelics and I actually
think that the problem of consciousness
is absolutely crucial to this. uh if if
I mean I think the most plausible
account of consciousness implies that
consciousness is something which is sort
of received by the biological organism
rather than produced by it. Because I
agree with you that you can't just put a
bunch of molecules together and get
consciousness. That doesn't make any
sense whatsoever. But it's interesting
that some of our best scientific
evidence is is suggesting the fact not
that the brain produces consciousness,
but that the brain inhibits and focuses
and organizes consciousness. it does not
produce it.
>> Yeah. So I I I I love your answer. So
you you were saying, you know, depending
on the person, you can do different
things. You can read philosophy of
>> I would recommend them to do that. In
other words, you know, look at that
depending on who they are.
>> You know, read the gospels. So I I think
what's what's interesting is that when
you you know, when when Steven gives the
concrete example of like if my friend
comes to you who's had this religious
awakening or prior to religious
awakening, what would you recommend to
them? And I think what's really
interesting is basically all of the
answers that you said I think
>> can map on to mechanism and I just love
to talk about that for a second. So the
first thing is you know you asked me at
the beginning am I religious? I I think
here's my understanding of and we were
talking a little bit about
>> you know people can have the subjective
feeling of religion. What is the
relationship to to that thing being
true? So here's what I've sort of
observed. I don't know if y'all have
ever been to like a really great
cathedral.
>> Oh yeah. But like you know uh if you go
to a great cathedral you don't have to
be Christian to be awe inspired by what
you see.
>> Sure.
>> So when I look at the project of
religion which is a little bit different
from spirituality I I one of the things
that I've observed is that religion is a
series of structures to evoke a personal
experience. So the whole point of
reading the gospels is fingers crossed
and we'll get to how to optimize that.
Fingers crossed if you read the gospels
enough or you go to church enough or you
pray enough, if you keep on talking to
Christ, one day he'll start talking
back. But I think the really interesting
thing is if you struggle with purpose,
you can read the gospels. If you go into
religion and I think what's changed now
is that we have so much science to
understand the mechanism through which
religious practices evoke subjective
experience. So I can go to church until
for my whole life but until I have that
relationship with God that is a
subjective experience that is evoked by
the sort of structure of the religious
practice.
>> So that is absolutely one thing you can
do. I think the cool thing is that the
problem with reading the gospels as as I
can clearly see that you've done and and
you know I I see the striving for
religion in you like you're like you you
want to have that right like you want to
know like what are these people actually
kind of talking about. I could be wrong
there but I I see this beautiful
striving that you're like you're trying
really hard to figure this stuff out
which is just awesome to see. I think
though that if we we kind of look at it
and you mentioned kind of psychedelics
as well and I think psychedelics is is
really interesting because
we know that so if you take someone who
has treatment refractory depression or
someone who has PTSD and you give them a
psychedelic the psychedelic is not
healing what is healing is specifically
whether they have an ego death
experience
>> so if I see colors and things like that
>> that doesn't solve things but the ego
death experience is what correlates with
clinical improvement soy Psychedelics
are a good way to evoke
um a subjective experience, right? So we
we know that there are a couple of
pieces and when I worked with people so
one of the things that we know is that
when you experience trauma, it shatters
your meaning of life.
>> Yes.
>> And so what so working a lot with people
with trauma and and this is something
that I kind of laid out uh in terms of
like making a guide about it. But what I
realized is that there's a set of things
that you can do relatively sequentially
to get your meaning back. And so I think
the cool thing about like you know
reading the gospels or psychedelics or
things like that is those each have some
fingers crossed change in you.
>> But the cool thing is like if you start
with something called alexathyia. So as
long as you are like using a bunch of
substances um as long as you are not
able to detect what is going on inside
you that is a fundamental prerequisite
of the subjective experience of meaning.
>> The second step to that is to go through
some stuff around ego. So this is like
the other like big thing that we try to
focus on is like when your default mode
network is hyperactive. This is the part
of your brain that gives you a sense of
who you are. Hyperactive default mode
networks lead to depression. Hyperactive
default mode networks also lead to some
degree of like existential depression.
>> And this is where so many of my patients
get tripped up when they start reading
philosophy. And this isn't against
philosophy, but remember this is
happening in a subjective mind. If
you're not careful, what we know is that
philosophy can turn into
intellectualizing. that there is a
psychological defense where you start
looking at theoretical stuff and it sort
of shapes the way that your mind
functions and it starts to become
maladaptive.
>> What does that mean in simple terms?
>> So people if you have a problem in life,
you can think about it a lot. You can
read about it a lot. There are a lot of
people that I've worked with that just
go on watching podcasts like chain
watching podcasts and reading books and
things like that, right? But their life
never changes.
>> Yes.
So this is where so there's a certain
amount of like you know learning how to
ground yourself in your experience which
involves reducing alexia which involves
dis dissolving your ego and this is
another really really important thing
that I think we find in people who have
purpose because if we go back to the
earlier example of the person who 30
days after they die the world ends
that person if they decide to still
write the book I think that there is a
certain ego involved in that, right? I'm
doing it for the sake of the work. It's
not for the benefit of humanity. It's
not for some transcendent purpose. It's
not for something that goes beyond my
death. Actually, it's the opposite. I am
do this doing this thing here and now
just for its own sake.
>> Mhm.
>> And so, preparing for this podcast, I
actually texted and called a couple of
my former patients. These are people
that I haven't seen in 3 to 5 years. And
I just asked them. I was like, "Hey,
bro. Do you have purpose? Tell me what
it is." And I was stunned by how their
answers are not about what happens after
they die.
>> They're very like, I'm just here for the
the flow of it, right? My purpose in
life is to experience what life has to
offer.
>> Mhm.
>> That's it. It's not about something
beyond you. And I think this is where
you're spot on, Alex, that a lot of
people deal with the fear of death by
wanting to live past it. But that is
actually that's the default mechanism
that we use. But that is actually
ego-driven, right? I want to exist.
>> Yes.
>> Beyond when I die. And so that gives
people some sense of purpose. But I
think the deepest sense of purpose
actually comes without that comes from
being able to make paper clips every day
and being content with that exercise.
>> You you're describing Seisphus being
happy is what you're doing.
>> Yeah. So Seisphus can be happy.
>> Yeah. I mean that that and and that's
explains Cisphus for those that don't
know about the guy pushing the rock up
the hill.
>> Kimu who is an existentialist even
though he doesn't call himself an
existentialist. Um he founds this school
known as absurdism.
Um which is a word I used earlier too.
And he he tries to describe the
absurdest condition of one in which you
have all of these desires about the
world but the world literally just can't
fulfill them. You're looking for
meaning. it's not there. It literally
that your your desire and the real world
are in conflict. And he calls this the
realization of this absurdity. And he
writes this this short treaty called the
myth of Seisphus, which is based on an
actual ancient myth of Seisphus who is
condemned by the gods as punishment to
roll a boulder up a hill. And when it
gets to the top, it rolls back down
again. And he goes back down and he
pushes the boulder up to the top of the
hill. And he does that over and over
again for eternity. The real torture of
this is not so much the suffering of the
pushing of the boulder. There's that,
but the suffering in the knowledge that
it's meaningless. And that that
describes the absurdest condition. Um,
and Alberu tries to respond to this by
imagining Sophus being happy and
essentially as an act of rebellion
against this condition, just getting on
with it anyway and being okay with it.
I've never been fulfilled by this. I
I've I've sort of always thought that
this may literally and I I understand
that there are people who could do that.
There are people who could write the
book and I I thought of Cisphus when you
said the person who writes the book
anyway because it almost feels like an
act of rebellion because it's not you
didn't just say they still write the
book. You said they write the book
anyway. They do it despite they do it
almost in protest of this condition.
Some people can do that but I think that
that that is
>> probably a sort of psychological cope.
Um no it's it's not it's not a cope.
It's a mechanism.
>> Well, I'm saying I think it's a cope. I
think that I think that that it's not
grounded in in anything rational.
>> I don't know if it's grounded in
anything rational. It's absolutely
grounded in something empirical.
>> Sure. But like again, you can
empirically like explain exactly why
somebody's brain is doing what it's
doing, but that doesn't mean that that
there's any rationality or truth in the
thing that their brain believes.
>> Sure. Right. But but I think this goes
back to the issue of whether there's
capital P. But I I think that you can
you can observe the world
>> and you can make observations and you
can I don't know what your relation to
scientific observations and truth is
whether those things are connected or
not. But I I think that we know actually
there there there are multiple
psychological mechanisms some of which
are copes
>> and some of which are not copes.
>> I suppose I mean like a philosophical
dope. I mean like it's it's not I think
it's untrue. I think that the person who
um is content in such a condition is
almost by definition delusory.
>> What does delusury mean?
>> Uh like under the influence of a
delusion. I think that it it is not a
happiness inducing condition to be
sisphus rolling his boulder up the
mountain.
>> Yeah. So so this is where I I I think
the data is actually against that. So
what the data shows is that it is your
attitude towards the circumstances of
your life that determines your happiness
or your lack of happiness.
>> Well, someone can be in a happy
delusion. In fact, that's why most
people suffer from delusions because it
makes them happy.
>> That's not why most people suffer from
delusions.
>> So do but you understand what I'm saying
that like like
>> Yeah, I understand what you're saying. I
just I just think that it's
>> you can't empirically show that
something is not a delusion because it
makes people happy.
>> Yeah. So, so you can absolutely
differentiate between a psychological
cope
>> and an attitude towards life that is not
a cope. And the reason you can
differentiate that is because of what is
underneath. And people can be
delusional, but they're not necessarily
delusional to make themselves happy. In
fact, quite the opposite. So, we have
diagnosis like schizophrenia of which
one of them is having delusions. And
those delusions, generally speaking, the
more schizophrenic and the stronger your
delusions are, the more that inversely
correlates with your happiness.
>> To be clear, I'm talking about like a
philosophical delusion.
>> The question I want to get an answer to
is this idea of the person who writes
the book or pushes the boulder up the
hill and can that person be have a
purposeful life?
>> Absolutely. So, so this is where this is
what's so confusing for people is that
people think so what Alex is saying I
think is a really really common
representation of what people think
about purpose. My purpose is to make
something that is greater from than me.
My purpose is to have some meaning or
impact in the world around me. What we
know is there's a a a great example of
this called self-determination theory
which is that if you ask people if you
look at people who have purpose what you
find is it's not about anything
transcendent
>> have purpose or have a sense of purpose.
have a sense of purpose.
>> Okay, we're asking them subjectively,
right? So if you if we're like like you
know and that's what I think
>> and these people are less likely to be
addicted to things, are more resilient,
tend to be subjectively happier as well.
So we're talking about subjective,
right?
>> What you find is that they have three
things. The first is that they have some
degree of self-direction.
>> So this is like I choose to do
something. They're not just taking it
from life. They are making choices. And
this is where people also get confused
because they think like which choice is
right. That kind of thinking is actually
irrelevant. There isn't a right choice
or a wrong choice. What correlates with
your sense of direction is whether you
make it or not. So you actually need to
get away from the concept of right and
wrong. The second thing is that they
need a stretching of their competence.
So if you just take a bunch of people
who are not being pushed and finding
themselves grow then their sense of
direction or purpose will decrease. And
the third thing is a sense of
relatedness. So there is something where
I have to know who I am and have other
people see that part of me. And if you
cultivate these three variables, then
your purpose will empirically
and by empirical what I mean is that we
can measurably we can literally measure
people's subjective experience in an
objective way. And so like these kinds
of things I think can end up improving
your purpose.
>> What are you measuring when when you're
looking for
>> Alex just I just would love to get your
answer to this idea. Can you do you
think the person who is pushing the
boulder up the hill or is writing the
book even though the world's about to
end can still genuinely live a
subjectively and by subjective I mean in
their in their opinion
>> um purposefully purposeful life.
>> Yes. Yeah. Absolutely. I think Seisphus
can be happy but I think that's not the
attitude that I would have and I don't
for myself find it satisfying any
analogy which is sufficiently similar to
the sysphus condition that is and the
attempted solution is well just imagine
sisphus happy um that's how he literally
ends the myth of sophus one must imagine
sisphus happy and I can imagine him and
say you know good for him um but
>> do you think you would be happier if you
believed in Greg's views of the world
>> almost certainly. Um, but not because of
Greg's views, but because of the the
confidence and satisfaction that they
bring. I think I'd feel just as much
meaning in my life if I was a convicted
Muslim or were I uh a Jane or something
like that, I think I would find that
fulfillment.
>> So, the content of the theology has no
bearing in your mind on the way a person
experiences their life.
>> Of course it does. Can you explain
specific terms content of the theology?
>> Well, the content well you talk about
different religions and there's these
different religions are in they they
cannot all be true as Alex has pointed
out. They have different content. They
say different things about human human
beings. For example, um the the u
the view that human beings are just uh
an illusion. The reality is illusion
maya that kind of thing. Well, that
seems to me to convey a certain
understanding to human beings. about
themselves and about the world. If you
have a view that human beings are
significant individuals, this is going
to convey a whole different experience
that they have. So, in other words, the
theology that they believe is true is
going to affect their feelings and their
experience. This is what I was getting
back at uh a little bit ago when I
talked about the person whose life has
been changed by becoming a Christian.
And uh these aren't just what you
explained to your friend. These are not
things that just happen here and there,
but there seems to be a very very broad
experience of this. Um, and a change
that doesn't depend on circumstances,
okay? It's because they adopt a
understanding of the the world that I
think is an accurate understanding. And
this is why their emotions and their
experience follows along because they're
choosing an accurate understanding of
the world. When you look at Jesus in the
Gospels, I I think it's so interesting
to me that people read the Gospels to be
uplifted by the reading of it. It seems
that misses the point that Jesus is
talking about the way the world is. He's
teaching about the nature of reality. He
was a Torah observant Jew. He wasn't a
Hindu. He wasn't a Buddhist. He was a
Jew. And he spoke in the context of
that. Okay. So, just to simply read the
Gospels as if we're going to read the uh
some nice things that people said to
make me feel better is missing Jesus'
point when he's trying to describe the
nature of reality. I don't think that's
how the gospel should be read. But I do
think I mean I I have a question for you
on that. This a personal question more
than anything. So I find myself in the
same position as Alex where I think I'd
be happier all things considered if I
had an anchoring in a religion. I think
that's like a subjectively true that I'd
be happier.
>> Mhm.
>> Um probably just because it would close
a gap of some sort. It would it would
anchor me in some way.
>> Answer a question. It would answer a
question and then with it would give me
more of a structure to my decision
making and
>> you know it would mean that when I have
moments of suffering I'd have a solution
to that moment of suffering. So if my
parents end up dying someday which I'm
sure they will
>> I will believe that they are still alive
and they are somewhere and they're fine
which will ease my suffering.
>> So I agree with Alex in that regard. The
problem I have is in order to adopt that
view I need some kind of I need to
believe it. It's true. like people can't
aren't very good at
>> lying to themselves and also when you
talk about my friend in Dubai has had
this experience he now feels better he
could have well felt better I believe if
he had you know believed that Islam was
true and become a Muslim
>> so so it's the feeling itself people can
get in a lot of ways I know people that
actually would tell you that they they
feel better now that they're out of the
cult and they're agnostic
>> and the cult the cult made them feel
terrible now they're agnostic they feel
better does that mean agnosticism
>> is truth
>> so the the presumption that you made is
a presumption we have to keep that in
mind I mean the the people that I have
talked to who were former Muslims and
are now Christians very devout Muslims
they did not have the experience of
satisfaction and fullness and connection
with God with in Islam that they do in
Christianity okay we want to be careful
that we know there are people who do
>> yeah there's people that would have gone
the other way and they'll be in the
comment section right now saying, "Well,
I went from Christianity to Islam."
>> Okay. Well, sure. I'm just telling you
what I what I know of those people.
Okay? And uh it I think it's a mistake
to say, "Well, everybody has their own
religion. They have their so experience
with their religion." Because I don't
think that's the case. I'm not saying
there aren't satisfied Muslims. That's
not what I'm saying. Or Buddhists or
Hindus or whatever. I'm But what I'm
saying is the the there is an evidential
element to the changed life. Okay? And
it may not be decisive. There may be
other things that are involved. Okay. Um
I do think that for many Christians, I
think you've made this point in the past
too. It's the experience with God that
makes the difference. But it's not that
the other evidences for the existence of
God, maybe philosophical type of
evidence haven't made a difference
because I've talked to lots of people
where they have made the difference
moving them in that direction.
>> The point there that it's evidential,
that's a presumption.
What I mean by evidential is that there
is uh information that can be brought to
bear that seems to be evidence
um indicating that the belief system is
true. It's not
>> is that a presumption?
>> I don't know why you would call it a
presumption
>> as in the the evidence that evidence
that Christianity is true from the
increased sense of purpose that people
get from becoming a Christian.
>> I think that's one of the evidence. It's
a subjective evidence. Yeah. So it's
evidence of the truth of Christianity.
>> Well, I wouldn't build the whole thing,
>> but it's evidence. It's contributing
evidence to the actual truth of
>> think the story of reality is simply
that God made us to be with him
>> and then we find the way that God
intends for us to connect with him
principally through forgiveness and be
restored to our relationship with the
father. And then that gives us when we
do that a deep sense of satisfaction. I
do think that's evidential.
>> You know, in Alex Field, he could
explain that through neuroscience,
right? Serotonin, dopamine, endorphins.
>> Yeah. So, can I go back to something
real quick? So, you know, I was thinking
about the sisphus example. Yes.
>> And I was just thinking to myself,
>> you know, so many people go to the gym
to do futile physical activity,
>> but not on its own for eternity with no
sense in which it's improving their
life, right? Imagine going to the gym
and not only is it not making you
healthier, it's actually just making you
fatter and you have to do it forever for
the rest of eternity for no reason with
no end.
>> And then somebody says, "Well, all
you've got to do is imagine that person
being happy."
>> Yeah. So, that's kind of interesting
because then that presumes that the
attitude through which you approach the
action is what determines it.
>> Determines what?
>> Determines whether you're happy or not.
Right? So every time you eat,
>> y
>> you buy yourself a trip to the toilet.
This is something you can never escape.
Sure.
>> It is true for all time. And yet, how do
you feel about going to the toilet?
>> I'm maybe I'm misunderstanding what
you're getting.
>> So So So I I I think it's it's
interesting, right? Because you're the
problem of Seisphus is in the way that
he views it. And this is exactly why I
think the paperclip example is like
actually such a good one because I think
what we find when we look at some of
these things like radical acceptance,
dialectical behavioral therapy, sort of
the ways in which people become happy
despite the fact that there are painful
things in life. It is an attitudinal
shift.
>> Totally. I I think I think one of the
reasons why it might seem like we keep
talking across purposes is because I
think you're you are offering an
explanation for why people feel a
particular way. And I'm trying to see
whether those those feelings are, shall
we say, philosophically validated,
whether they are those those feelings
are are sensitive to truth. If the way
you feel about the world is accurate. So
I can I can perfectly understand that
it's possible for Sephus to be happy.
What I'm saying is that I think that the
philosophical underpinning that would be
required for him to be content in that
condition is
unsatisfying, at least to me. So as a as
a
>> what what so what is a what is a
philosophical truth?
>> It doesn't have to I mean maybe I
shouldn't say philosophical truth but I
mean to say I mean to separate it from
what you might describe as like a
neurological truth which is to say it
could be true that your brain believes
this or believes that based on this or
that condition. I'm saying that totally.
But what I'm interested in is the thing
that it believes. Is it true or false?
You know it could be in the same way
that you know believing in Christianity
can make you happy. It can make you sad
and you can you can scan someone's
brain. You can put them in an MRI
scanner and scan their brain when they
at the moment they convert to
Christianity and see that it starts
going haywire.
>> But the brain MRI is not going to show
any beliefs. It's just nothing to do
with the truth.
>> Neurological activity beliefs aren't but
beliefs aren't in the brain.
>> Yeah, we we're we're going to get to
that in
>> I kind of I kind of agree. So, Alex, I
think this is what I I I thank you so
much for pointing out how we're kind of
talking across each other because I I
think this is the really weird thing and
I'm going to say something and then as
we talk about consciousness and what we
just talked about, I'm going to torpedo
it.
>> But I I think what we sort of find is
that from a practical sense and this
could be where like philosophy I I don't
know what the how the word practical
ties together with philosophy because I
tend to think of philosophy as sort of
practical. We can go into that in a
second. But I I think from the
perspective of finding purpose.
>> Mhm.
>> Now, I'm not talking about purpose as a
capital P truth, right? A capital T
truth.
>> Finding purpose.
What
it may not be philosophically satisfying
to you, but what we sort of know from
empirical evidence of people who are
purposeless and people who are
purposeful is that the the subjective
feeling of purpose is comes out of a
number of different things like like I
mentioned like kind of autonomy being
able to detect your emotions also a
sense of like narrative identity. So
having a purpose in life requires a you.
And one of the reasons that no one feels
like they are going somewhere in life is
because they don't really have a clear
sense of who they are.
>> And so
I think that it's a great kind of catch
that we're sort of talking across
purposes because I I don't know the
thing that you find philosophic not
philosophically true maybe
neurologically true but isn't
philosophically true.
>> I don't know how to approach that. I
mean, I think I sort of do because if we
talk about consciousness and subjective
experience and how your friend was
transformed and by the way, he may not
be transformed. So there's speaking of
coping, there's a chance that when
someone, you know, drastically joins a
religion and like this is great. That is
like the mother of all copes, right? So
sometimes they find they adopt they it's
not identity formation, it's actually
identification where like I'm going to
join this team and now I'm on this team
and now that I have this team, now I
know who I am. Now I have a purpose.
Like everything kind of gets laid out.
But oftentimes, this is also why
religion is not like 100% at giving
people happiness and and things like
that because there is an internal
subjective experience of a relationship
with God or something like that, which I
think we can segue to consciousness.
That's ultimately what determines
whether you you feel really good about
it. And then the other really
interesting thing is through some of
those subjective experiences,
I think we the people who have these
subjective experiences believe that it
gives them access to truth with a higher
like the Gnostics and and and folks like
that.
>> Mhm.
>> I did something at 24 years old that has
had a profound impact on my life. I set
myself the challenge of posting every
single day on my social media channels.
And at the time I was doing it to grow
my following. But it had this profound
impact on my life. And two remarkable
things happened when I did that. I
managed to learn faster because every
single day I'm capturing what is
happening to me and trying to distill it
down into something that I can share
with the world. But more remarkably, it
led me to building a following of many
millions of people. And that's the basis
that I use to launch the diary of a SEO.
And that's why I want to tell you about
our sponsor today, Adobe Express. They
are the platform that I use to make all
the posts across my LinkedIn and across
my Instagram. It's a couple of clicks
and you don't need to be an expert. And
that is why I love using it because I'm
not an expert in graphic design. It's
accessible to use for all of us, even if
we don't have the technical prowess to
design great things. So, if you want to
start compounding both your reach and
your knowledge like I did at 24 years
old, then head to adobe.
Stephven and get started with Adobe
Express. That's adobe.
slashsteeen.
>> Let me just bring it back down to um
some of the popular questions we had
from our audience. One of the most
popular questions we had is, "Do we each
have a specific per purpose or is it
self-chosen?" Greg.
>> Well, in my view, if God has made us for
a reason and he wants us to be in
relationship with us, each individual
person has different capabilities and
fulfilling those capabilities that God
has given him, general ones and specific
ones. Like I have my own particular
peculiar capabilities. Doing that is
going to make me satisfied. Okay.
>> So, did God give me a purpose?
>> Yes.
>> And is it different from Alex's purpose?
I would say in in the the in the kind of
the minutia, yes, you're a different
individual than he is.
>> And can I ask you a question that then
springs to mind? Yeah. Again, I'm very
curious. If Steven Bartlett had gotten
cancer at one years old and I died,
>> I see. Yeah. Well, then you wouldn't be
fulfilling the particulars that God had
intended for you. But that kind of thing
happens because we live in a broken
world.
>> It isn't the perfect world. It is not
the good. It's it's not the totally good
moral that God made. Something happened
that broke the world. Human rebellion.
Human rebellion.
>> At what point in history?
>> Well, early on with our first parents.
Okay.
>> So, the first humans,
>> the first humans, that's why all humans
since then have the same proclivity
towards evil. It's pretty much
quantifiable.
>> Does that include other species of human
homony?
>> Well, I know that's a question that a
lot of people are discussing right now.
Okay. Okay. And where exactly do you
draw that line? And I'm not
>> that isn't an area that I go deep in.
But I do think that there was a an
original progenitor to the human race as
we understand it right now.
>> Sure.
>> That has the image of God in man
>> and violated God's commands, rebelled
against God, and that had an impact on
the world. Okay. And that is why
>> so therefore you're going to have some
people aren't going to be,
>> you know, fulfilling all of their the
ultimate purposes that God has for them
in this world. Just to be clear,
children
>> get cancer.
>> Sure.
>> Because say 2 million years ago roughly
the start of the human species.
>> I'm not going to set a date on it.
>> Somebody rebelled against God's
>> commands and that is the explanation for
>> this is a fair question and you know
some of these details I haven't worked
out. What about earthquakes and tsunamis
and all those kinds of things? Okay. Um
clearly there is an impact of human
rebellion upon the earth. Okay. what the
extent of that impact is, I'm not
entirely sure. But this is why I use the
word broken because it's a rather broad
term rather than trying to identify
every instance of things that seem
anomalous to a good world, not the way
it should be, so to speak. Okay. I think
that's an explanation for these things
even though we can't necessarily itemize
each individual particular instance and
how it falls short. Alex, I want to put
the same question to you, which is do
you think that you were born with a
purpose that was endowed for your life?
>> No, not not in the literal sense. I
think that there are that I was born
with literal like proclivities built
into my my consciousness and my DNA. Um
>> almost want to do tendencies. Yeah,
tendency is a great word. Yeah. For
example, my tendency to to eat food. I I
I don't think I learned that. I think I
was born with it. But it's like I would
use the language of when you say if you
said do you think that you were you know
you were given hunger from birth I'd be
like no in a poetic sense maybe but what
I mean say is I was born with this thing
called hunger which I didn't learn which
was just a part of my makeup. I think
the same thing is true for many
motivations of life such as the sort of
meaning that you that you might report
feeling. I think it's there from from
child birth.
>> Same question for you Alec. Do you think
that we each have a specific purpose or
is it self-chosen?
>> I think it's both. So I'm going to
introduce two concepts that we haven't
talked about yet. Dharma and karma. And
um I think these are concepts that
are sometimes hard to understand. I'm
going to do my best to kind of speedrun
them. So dharma is the Sanskrit word
that kind of gets translated as duty. Uh
the way that I would describe dharma,
the reason I think it's so important is
right now if we look at the world,
people are like not having a good time.
And often times what they do is they're
stuck between this choice of doing what
they want and doing what they should. So
doing what they want is maybe
dopamineergic is maybe fun in some way.
Doing what they should is like painful
in some way. So for me what I think
dharma is dharma is like sort of duty.
But I think the key thing that helps
people once they find their dharma is
it's what allows you to choose the
negative thing. It it's what allows you
to choose the hard thing. So if someone
points a gun at me and I look at that
gun, that gun means pain, suffering,
death, you know, my life will will will
end and then I will have nothing to
leave behind me. So my purpose will end.
So I I try to move away from that thing.
But if someone points the gun at my
child because I have this overwhelming
sense of of love and joy or whatever, I
step into the path of that thing. So I
think once we understand what our duty
is, that gives us a sense of tethering.
It gives us a sense of direction. Um I
think what confuses a lot of people is
that they think duty is like some
transcendental that's like a big thing
like duty with a capital D like I was
born on this earth to do these like
particular big tasks like I need to say
cure cancer or something like that.
Oftentimes dharma is really small. So
the way
>> duty is not transcendent and it's not
tied to some moral transcendent thing.
>> I I think I don't know about moral. So
this is where I think like I
>> you said should.
So that's usually a moral term, right?
>> In the west, right? So I think there's a
whole different set of axioms. I'm using
dharma and that's what people will like
put morality onto dharma where I I don't
think that that's actually fair.
>> So so I going back to I have a duty just
to give another example. Um and y'all
can decide whether this is moral or not,
but when I'm sort of working in the
emergency room and you know a patient
walks in, I have a duty to that patient.
So what a lot of people don't understand
about dharma is that it is very
environmentally determined. So your
dharma will depend somewhat on you know
the the family that you have the
responsibilities that you have. If you
have children you have a dharma to those
people. So I think that's one part of
what we would call purpose. I think the
other part of purpose and I think this
gets really closer to the more western
conception is karma. So going back to
your your question about you know if a
child with with cancer uh dies at the
age of one is their purpose fulfilled
arguably yes because that could have
been their purpose in this life right so
their purpose could have been so there's
a really interesting story about you
know many years ago there was a there
were a group of angels this I'm just
going to use the western terminology
devas who disturbed Shiva in his
meditation and so he cursed them and he
said I'm going to the curse that you
guys are going to do is y'all are going
to be born on the earth for one lifetime
of a human. And then the day of us were
like, "Oh my god, like this is terrible.
Like we're going to be cursed to be born
on the earth and the earth is full of
suffering and cisphus and there's no
meaning with a capital M." So then they
go to Shiva's daughter and they ask her,
"Hey, can you help us out?" Like, "Can
you please go talk to your dad? Can you
please get him to change his sentence?"
And she says that Shiva is never going
to change his sentence. That's
impossible to do. He's also kind of this
embodiment of karma and things like
that. But so he says, "But I can help
y'all out. What I can do is I'm going to
be born with y'all." And then there's
this other story in the Mahabharat where
basically she has seven children and
then she drowns them the day after
they're born. And so she says, "The
technical situation is you're going to
be born for one lifetime. I can make a
lifetime happen in a moment." Now, I
don't know if that's true. I don't know
if that's moral. I don't know if it's
mythology
>> but a potential explanation for why
children get cancer.
>> It's a potential explanation for why
children get cancer. Now I think the the
karma thing is when you said is your
purpose in life predetermined. So I
think that you inherit
a certain amount of circumstances
and that part of your purpose
will be in relation to the circumstances
that you inherit. But the other thing
about karma which I think a lot of
people misunderstand is they think that
it means destiny. I think all it means
is Newton's third law which is every
action has an equal and opposite
reaction. That while you may inherit a
set of circumstances
the way that you act is sewing seeds for
your future life.
So this is where like you know I I know
I'm introducing a bunch of concepts and
it's interesting. I you know we we
started a a membership program here at
Healthy Gamer and part of the reason we
did that is because a lot of these
concepts if you turn them into like
50-minute YouTube videos people just end
up with more questions than answers. So
we go into a lot of depth and I think it
requires some depth because I'm sure
everybody who's listening has a ton of
questions. But in order to succinctly
answer your question, I would say that
yeah, you were born for I don't know
about a specific reason, but there's a
set of different things which only you
can do like you are a unique set of
genetics. You are a unique set of
experiences. You are a unique set of
psychology. And this process it in
psychiatry is something that we call
meaning making helps a lot when people
have trauma. Right? So to help someone
understand why did this terrible thing
happen to you and once you make meaning
from it that helps you adaptively
>> but I think that it's also not like
predestined necessarily. You can
procrastinate on fulfilling your karmmas
and then they'll just keep coming back.
>> So Dr. K, I still have a question about
this. You you talk about duty and I'd
asked about morality there and you you
kind of begged off on that. Well, not
really. But then you use the word
obligation in the emergency room. And it
sounds to me when you talk about those
things, you are actually invoking moral
categories. Things you ought to do. You
have an obligation to do. You have a
duty to do. Maybe the right thing. You
didn't use this phrase, but it sounds
like you're saying this is the right
thing to do, the virtuous thing to do as
opposed to the wrong thing to do. So,
how how am I to understand those phrases
if they are not really invoking genuine
moral categories?
So when you say moral categories, are
you referring to a transcendental right
and wrong?
>> I'm talking about ethical principles,
ethical rights and wrong if you want.
They are transcendent because they're
not simply in the molecules as it were.
They're above us transcend. So yes, in
that sense. Okay.
>> Yeah. And uh has and there are
consequences to our behaviors one way or
another. And the consequences it's not
just you know utilitarian. It's not
just, well, I if I put toast in too
long, it'll burn the toast, but you're
you ought to do the things that you just
described. You ought to help that
person. Okay. I think it's a fairly
common sensible word, a moral category,
virtue, vice kind of thing. I I think
whether it's common sensical depends on
what's common, right? So, I I think that
this is where these concepts I don't
think are onetoone. So I think doing
your dharma is basically the way I would
describe your dharma is when I throw a
ball in the air, it comes down.
>> Okay.
>> Right. So dharma is kind of doing what
is the second part of what you've kind
of signed up for. So when you say you
ought to help the person in the
emergency room, all you mean is you're
not morally compelled to do that in in
terms of a virtue, but there is a a
consequence for you to do that as
opposed to doing the opposite.
>> Yes. And I think there is a layer of
morality, but that is not within dharma.
So for example, there are yamas and
nyamas, which are things like
truthfulness, a himsa, which means
non-violence. So there's a set of
different things that we would generally
speaking call morality. And doing those
things is usually in accordance with
dharma. But you know the mahabharat is a
great case of someone saying I don't
want to kill my cousins and I don't want
to kill my teacher and Krishna saying
you absolutely should because it is in
accordance with dharma. So I think
dharma often times gets like translated
over to morality but I think you lose
something in translation.
>> Greg, can I ask you do you think you
have you can have a fulfilling life
without having a transcendent purpose
>> in some measure? in some measure. What I
described earlier is if God made us for
a purpose and made the world for human
flourishing and I think we get a basic
description of that in the beginning of
our story for example then people who
don't even believe in God or even about
even anything religious at all if they
if they fall within the pattern of the
things that God has created for
flourishing they're going to flourish in
some significant measure. You mentioned
a few moments ago about having children
and this is somewhat of a universal
experience. Now you made a kind of a
naturalistic characterization of why we
feel that way. Um my sense is that God
made us for that purpose. Be fruitful,
multiply, subdue. And subdue doesn't
mean rape the earth. It means to work
productively what God has given us to
serve. Now somebody can get married and
stay married and have children and
fulfill that purpose there and be very
satisfied in doing it as opposed to all
kinds of other var variations that it's
just going to mess up their life. and
they're going to experience satisfaction
and fulfillment in it. But that's
because they're in a certain sense
they're doing the things that God has
made human beings to do so that they
would flourish. It's just like you can
think of it in very mechanistic terms.
You have a vehicle that meant to operate
a certain way and if you do the things
properly for that vehicle, it's going to
run well and do
>> so. So, I can have a I can have a grand
feeling of purpose if I do many of the
the things that are considered virtuous
within scripture without needing to
believe.
>> Yeah, you could still be virtuous.
Certainly, you can do those things. My
argument, and this is what I was getting
at a little earlier, uh Dr. Kay, is that
if if there is no God establishing a
right and wrong, then there is no right
and wrong because there is no law that
we're we're we're conforming ourselves
to. We are just doing stuff. All right.
Now,
>> if you believe the sort of evolutionary
perspective on this
>> taken as a whole, I don't not the way
that uh Alex has taken. It's a grand
explanation of pretty much everything.
>> It's not an explanation of everything.
It's an explanation of the variance of
life on Earth
>> because evolution does I was thinking
about my dog. I was thinking about Pablo
and I was thinking, why does he have sex
with other dogs? Why does he why does he
protect his puppies?
>> Yeah.
>> You know, why does he do these things
that somewhat in uh Dr. K's example
there, he he takes care of things. takes
care of me when I'm not in the house. If
someone comes in and my girlfriend's
there, he takes care of my girlfriend.
He barks only when she's she's at home
alone. So, he seems to be expressing
some form of morality. He seems to
understand his own sort of idea of right
and wrong. But I has that
>> well, I wouldn't characterize it that
that way as if he's thinking I ought to
do this and if I don't do that, then I'm
doing something wrong. I think animals
have instincts that they're in imbued
with that can be influenced by natural
factors to some degree, I guess. Um, but
they are made for purposes. And this is
the reason that many of the creatures
act the way they do is because of these
very sophisticated instincts that allow
them to get along in life and do well
and survive and reproduce.
>> But I don't I don't have any reason to
think that they're Yeah. survive and
reproduce. Of course,
>> but I don't have any reason to think
that they're thinking I'm doing the
moral thing.
>> And if they didn't do the thing that we
would be uh it would be appropriate to
accuse them of doing something immoral,
this or whatever. History's almost shown
that even in times where where we look
back and go that was not the moral thing
like you know Nazis in in World War II.
>> Yeah.
>> Um they acted in a way that was helped
them survive in the context they're in.
So the Nazi that you know would go to
the concentration camp then come home
and be really nice to his family. He
thought he was doing the right thing.
>> This is why one of the reasons I think
this is the evolutionary explanation is
inadequate. Okay. because it seems that
there are lots of things that people do
that seem to be good for them or for
their tribe that characteristically
we'll look at and we'll assess it and
the assessment would is that that is
wrong it's evil it's wicked and I think
that our assessments are reliable in
that regard okay that we have moral
intuitions that allow us to see things
that are real about that and these
things are relatively universal I mean
it doesn't matter where you live or when
you live people are asking the question
about the problem of evil in the world
okay and I think it's because of of what
evil was seems to change over time
because me I mean I wouldn't be sat at
this table many a couple hundred years
ago because I'm black and everybody at
the time thought that that was the right
thing they didn't think that was an evil
thing at the time
>> well everybody at the time didn't think
that you know there are going to be
social mores and have that and that are
going to change over time and do people
do respond in different ways but just
because you have variations in the way
people believe about morality doesn't
mean that there's there isn't a morality
that's a sound morality And Lewis's CS
Lewis has done a study of this looked at
the kinds of things that seem to
transcend culture in terms of
assessments, moral assessments that seem
to be true about every culture. A lot of
times the differences are not
differences in moral facts, but they are
uh like the morality is actually
changed, but a difference in perception.
Okay. So what uh what counts as uh
heroism in some cases would not count as
heroism in other cases even though
heroism is considered a noble kind of
thing. I've been waiting for an
opportunity to rewind to the fact that
we just brushed over
two of what I think are the best
available at least first that came to
mind explanations as to why children get
cancer. And I just wondered as as a as a
question whether you consider whether
whether your explanation sounds to you
as your explanation sounds to you as I
think both of them sound to me and I
don't know how they sound to you Stephen
but the idea that
>> the thing that we are most fundamentally
confronted with I think on an
existential level is suffering
>> and there's our own suffering and then
there's the suffering of others and the
seemingly meaningless suffering of a
child who's undergoing cancer and does
not survive
And I'm told that in the face of such
existential
tragedy,
turn to religion to give us a sort of
sense of fulfillment and a sense of
explanation. But when asked about the
mechanism of how, I'm told it's because
at some undisclosed number of years ago,
somebody commit a sin against God and
that's why your child has now died of
cancer. There are millions of people who
listen to this show. there will be
people listening to this whose children
have died of cancer. I wonder if that
brings them any kind of consolation.
Similarly, the idea that, you know,
maybe it's some disgruntled angels who
didn't want to come down to earth for
too long and so if anything, you're
actually doing them a favor by killing
them of cancer. I don't know if that's
bringing the kind of they're looking
for.
>> What's your answer to that?
>> I don't think I have one, but I don't
like people professing that they do have
an answer, but when it comes down to it,
>> actually saying something which I think
will provide the opposite effect, which
and I don't mean this personally. I mean
as as a point of religious explanation.
The idea that this is going to bring
>> everyone's going to get a chance to
respond to this. So
>> the idea that this even approximates an
explanation as to why this happens. I
would ask you to consider what you find
more likely if we assume that we are
essentially existing here as accidental
accidental organisms just competing in a
struggle for survival with no endowed
meaning or supervision. What might we
expect to find? And I would ask what you
would expect to find if we were created
with purpose by a loving God who wants
us all to come into communion with him.
But for some reason thinks it's
necessary that we exist in this veil of
tears in this material world first. What
would you expect to find?
>> I don't think and then look at what you
do find.
>> Look at what you do find in the natural
world. Even if you just take into
consideration nonhuman animal suffering
just an unfathomable amount of negative
experience,
>> right?
>> There's seemingly no reason. Not to
mention the fact that children are
getting cancer as you say and as you've
already alluded to there are evils that
humans commit like the Holocaust. But
there are evils which they don't like
earthquakes and tsunamis and the like.
>> I don't think we would expect to see any
of this if we assume that hypothesis.
But if we assume that we are just
accidentally existing organisms in a in
a struggle for survival, not only do we
explain this, but we also come to expect
it. So I think it provides a much better
explanation. That is not to say
justification. The idea we were talking
about evolution. You said that the
problem that you have with the Darwinian
worldview is that it seems to say that
it seems to favor survival of the
fittest. And yet there are things which
evolution seems to point to that we
would morally condemn. Well, of course,
because evolution by natural selection
is an explanation for how things got the
way they were. It's in no way a
justification for behaviors. It it
doesn't even function that way. No
scientific theory of why things happen
are any kind of justification any more
than Newton's laws of gravity are a
justification a moral justification for
the motion of the planets. That's of
course it's not the case. It's just an
explanation. But but I just really want
to drive home this point.
>> Mhm.
>> That it has to do more. If you want
religious traditions to do what you
claim that they do, which is provide
existential comfort for people who are
suffering, you have to do more in the
face of children dying of cancer than
some reference to mythical human beings
who existed or
Well, in in a way that's completely
unintelligible.
>> There's a lot there. Okay. I don't
expect it's could be comfort to anybody
to say who's suffering from whatever to
say that there was a fall. Okay. The
fall is just the explanation for what
went wrong and why there is wrong in the
world. Like I said earlier, doesn't
matter where you live or when you live,
everybody knows something's wrong. And
the way they express that concern about
something wrong is in moral terms. The
world is not the way it ought to be.
should be different there and then when
you give examples of it sometimes
there's natural evil but generally it's
examples of moral evil what we would
call moral evil okay things that people
shouldn't do okay
>> that's why I particularly avoided those
>> no right you didn't include any examples
and but you the implication is and this
is where you know Richard Dawkins's
famous statement that this is exactly
the kind of world we'd expect
>> if there was at the basis you know no
design no justice, no evil, no good,
nothing but blind, pitless, indifferent.
So you
>> Well, I actually think this isn't the
world that we find, the one he just
described. Yes, it's a world filled with
suffering, and there's a way of
explaining that which you just did.
There's also another way of explaining
it that has a solution. Okay. Um,
>> what is that explanation?
>> Pardon me, that God is in the process of
solving the problem of evil over time.
>> I mean, the explanation for why the
evil's there in the first place. You
said the fool, and I I don't mean to
interrupt, but you said it. You've
referenced the fool twice now and the
last time I tried this you it seemed
like you sort of said that you don't
really know but if the fool is
>> I wasn't I wasn't giving particular
details about the ancestry of human
evolution
>> historically what is the fool
>> the fall is when our first parents
>> characteristically known as Adam and Eve
in the story and the account of reality
>> um rebelled against God and when they
rebelled against God they disobeyed him
is what's important uh he had given them
a restriction they disobeyed that and
when they disob obeyed that they broke
their relationship with God through
rebellion. They broke their relationship
with each other. They broke their
relationship with the environment. All
of that had these kind of cosmic
effects. There's a solution though.
That's just the first threeand
finish the thought. Okay. The the
principal issue is rebellion or
disobedience. Okay. There are different
ways it's characterized, but that's the
point in my view. The disobedience.
Okay.
>> Of of what though?
>> Pardon me.
>> Disobedience of of what? Like what was
it?
>> God told them not to do one thing. Don't
eat from the the tree of the knowledge
of good and evil and they disobeyed.
>> Do you interpret that literally?
>> Pardon?
>> Like an actual tree and an actual fruit.
>> I do take that as a straightforward
account, but that's not the important
part. I don't want to get
>> So children get cancer because somebody
ate So children get cancer because a few
million years ago someone ate a fruit.
>> Let me just back up and give you the
entire account. This would be this would
be I think more helpful.
>> I'm not trying to be difficult by the
way. I just really I don't want to just
brush over these points when we
reference. I mean people listening might
be like I've never heard of Adam and Eve
and they they'll need to know what
>> the point I'm making is that there was a
disobedience by human beings that had an
impact on their relationship with God
which they were created for and had an
impact on the rest of the world and
since then pro that problem of evil
broadly grit since then the world's been
broken and God has a plan for bringing
that back together not only for making
the world whole again but also for
bringing human beings back in proper
relationship with him when they're in
rebellion with him. And this is where
Jesus comes in. Now, I I I've written a
piece called the story of reality, a
book that's meant to characterize that
in fairly clear terms in more general
terms. It isn't meant to answer all of
these questions because some of them
frankly are imponderables, but the
larger picture can be understood and is
in the story. It's in the account of
reality in the scriptures, the Hebrew
scriptures and in the Christian
scriptures. They form a unit. Okay? And
these are the things that Jesus spoke to
and Jesus took these things seriously
based on what he had to say about these
particular things. Okay. So because we
broadly speaking now because we live in
a broken world there is an answer that
we have to that we have a poss possible
answer. You know it was uh Bertrren
Russell who famously said how are you
going to talk about God when you're
kneeling at the bed of a dying child
which I think is very emotionally
compelling. But I listened to
philosopher William Craig who you also
know I think
>> who said what is Bert and Russell the
atheist going to say when he's kneeling
at the bed of a dying child.
>> Tough luck too bad. That's just the way
it goes. There is no answer that he has.
>> Dr. K, can you come in with your
response as well?
>> Sure. First of all, Alex, I want to
thank you for
bringing up and being a bit bulldogish.
I mean that in a good way. You grabbed
something. and you were like, "This is
not okay."
>> Well, we forget that people are
listening to this whose children have
died of cancer.
>> I I I totally get that.
>> I think we just need to keep it in mind,
you know,
>> 100%. So, so I'm really glad you said
that because I realize that I offered a
terrible example. And I say this as
someone I can remember the day I was a
third-year medical student on my first
pediatric rotation. I was working in the
ICU overnight and there was a
nine-year-old child who had I think
lymphoma
and I watched and was with their parents
as that child moved towards death. I
have worked in offices where people will
come into my my
uh office and they'll say, you know,
they'll they'll ask me about karma and
they'll be like, I was 9 years old when
I was sexually assaulted. Are you
telling me that this is like part of
purpose or whatever? I also remember
when I was in India, one of my best
friends, the first time I went to India,
I spent about seven years studying to
become a monk. I discovered a lot of
really cool stuff like meditation, had
some transcendental experiences, altered
my worldview. And one of my best friends
who is also a very accomplished
meditator, I we kind of got to talking
about religion and I was like, you know,
what do you think about like Hinduism
and some of these concepts? And he said,
I can't accept any religion that says
if you were raped, it's your fault. Yes.
So that stuck with me. And so for a long
time, at the very beginning, Stephen
asked me a question. Am I Hindu? I mean,
am I religious? And I I guess I would
say yes. So that thought really stuck
with me. I think for a long time I was
an atheist. I think I'm still an
atheist. I think there are a couple of
other things that are a little bit
unusual. So like people think like in
the west we think that atheism,
polytheism and monotheism are
contradictions. We don't really think
that in Hinduism like those things can
coexist. Mhm.
>> So, and what I'm really grateful for you
for is because I think when I'm so glad
you said that because I think when I
offered the example that I offered,
it's so interesting because I was
thinking about why I mentioned that we
have a membership. And the reason I
mentioned it is because this is this is
one of those things that I have lectured
about for four to six hours. And if you
listen to that lecture, then you will
understand the context that I'm coming
from. But without that context and if
you sort of assume there's so many
axioms about morality and deserving
>> that that that example without the
appropriate context sounds awful. It's
like your kid died at the age of one.
Oh, there's some greater purpose. You
just don't know what it is. you.
Yeah. Right.
>> That is not comforting at all. So here's
where I am now. I I really think this is
I think Garma is good in the sense that
it it helps people. I I also think it's
true. But here's kind of where I am now.
So that was sort of my journey. I
realized it was out of order.
Transcendental experience. Garma seems
awful. There's this concept of
deserving. Then many years later through
practice with people who have been
sexually assaulted and and watching
children die in the pediatric ICU
grappling with these problems. Not just
like there are people out there. It's
like you're in the room with these
people when their child is dying. What
do you say to them?
>> And even more so now as a psychiatrist
with end of life care and things like
that. So I think the first thing to
understand or first question that I have
for you is when I say the word karma,
what does that mean
to you?
>> I don't know.
>> Okay.
>> I don't know what you mean you mean by
that.
>> So So I I think the first thing to
understand about garma is it's just the
principle of cause and effect.
>> Yeah. So when a child dies of cancer,
what would you say is the cause of their
death?
>> Well, I I I don't know about the science
of cancer very much, but I would suppose
it's the cancer.
>> Perfect. Right. So that is in accordance
with the law of Gharma. Now, what is the
reason they got cancer?
>> I don't know.
>> Okay.
>> I mean, what pick any reason you like.
>> There could be a genetic mutation,
random chance, things like that.
>> So what I think that all karma is is
action and reaction. That's it.
So if you understand the doctrine of
karma, what it helps you do is see the
way that causes and effects link to each
other. It does not have anything to do
with deserving more so than if I have a
genetic mutation and I wind up with
cancer. That is an action that has an
effect. Th this is why I was reluctant
to engage with moralities because I
think there are certain assumptions that
I think come from this kind of Abrahamic
or Judeo-Christian worldview that get
injected
into these concepts like karma and
dharma which is why I hate translating
them because anytime I translate
something it's going to be filled in. So
you really have to understand karma. But
I would say all karma is devoid it of
remove it denote it of all morality
remove it of all deserve beyond simple
Newtonian mechanics and that actions
have consequences.
>> Now the reason that this is helpful okay
now I'm realize I'm making a functional
claim here not a claim about
>> philosophical truth because I don't know
what else to call it.
>> I do think it's philosophically true but
that's not what I'm talking about right
here. um is that when you're sitting
with a human being because your your
your primary concern is
when a child with cancer dies or is
dying, how do you deal? How do you There
are people who are suffering. If we're
not careful, we're going to hurt them.
Right. That's what you're saying.
>> Um that's one thing I'm saying. Yeah.
Right. So, so I I think what I sort of
>> there's how it makes people feel, but
there's also the literal explanation for
why they suffer. You know, it's it's one
thing to say that, you know, this this
religious uh narrative will bring you
some comfort, but it's another thing as
well. I think that's something you need
to keep in mind. But you're saying more
than that as a religious person, you're
not just saying that this narrative will
bring you comfort. You're saying this is
why it's happening. This is why your
child has cancer.
>> So, so what I would say, so here's my
kind of uh response to that. So the
first is
I think that when I sit with people who
were sexually used at the age of nine,
didn't do anything to deserve it, you
know, people will say like, oh, like you
have to be careful what you wear and
stuff like that. I mean, I you know, I
have patients that were in onesies and
overalls and all kinds of stuff.
>> Nine.
>> Huh.
>> At the age of nine.
>> Yeah. People will say all kinds of
stuff. So um and and what I find with
working with them and there's plenty of
data to back this up is that there's a
certain amount of meaning making
>> that is necessary to comfort those
people to heal from that thing. And the
meaning making if we're talking about
empirically
making meaning out of things that are
bad is one of the ways that you
alleviate suffering. Mhm.
>> So one of the things that I find is
helpful as an option for that meaning
making is understanding the doctrine of
dharma. And when I share it with people
doesn't work for everybody. So from a
clinical standpoint I'm not saying you
should believe in the doctrine of karma.
I'm just and I I'm not saying you should
believe in Christianity or anything like
that. The important thing is this is
what the science shows is you should
make a concerted effort to make meaning.
And because of my background, because of
my expertise,
helping people understand things from a
karmic perspective, I would say is
helpful about 80 to 90% of the time.
>> But there's a very important caveat
there from a data standpoint is that
there is a huge selection bias to who
comes into my office. There's a good
chance that these people are already
open to that concept and are interested
in learning more. So I make no claims
about that concept being superior to
anything else. Mhm.
>> But I think what we know from psychiatry
is that it's not so clear which one is
the best, but that you just have some
way of like making sense of what happens
to you.
>> Mhm.
>> And that's just one thing that I think
is
an option. And I happen to believe in
the principle of cause and effect, which
is all karma is. There's no morality
tied to it.
>> It sounds like you're saying that it's
just something that it just happens.
>> What do you mean it just happens?
>> It just happens. No, absolutely not. I'm
saying the exact opposite. So, it just
happens does not imply a cause.
>> No, it I mean it it just happens as the
result of some series of causes. Like,
why do children get cancer? It's just
the result of a series of causes. Yes,
>> that's it.
>> Yes.
>> There's no redemption. There's no
meaning. There's no intention. It's just
it just happens.
>> And that's fine because I I I believe
that's the case. I think that's true.
>> No. No. I I mean I I think that we have
overwhelming evidence
overwhelming that if you have a BA
negative mutation on both sides that you
have a 98 to 99% chance of getting
breast cancer that having this mutation
here warrants a prophylactic double
mastctomy which means removing both
breasts before the cancer even shows up.
>> But I think the reason why maybe I'm
wrong about this but I think the reason
you brought this up Stephen was not
because you were interested when you
said like I don't think you worded it
like this but you know why does a child
get cancer? Why would young Steven have
gotten cancer? I don't think you mean in
a scientific sense. I don't think you
mean literally explain to me the process
by which cancer develops in my brain
gives me leukemia. I think you mean why
does this happen if being supervised? I
mean, you asked it to to Greg in the
context of religious supervision of the
universe. And
I think the irony is that we're in a
context of a discussion where usually
the boots on the other foot and I'm sort
of being told that as a as a
non-religious person, as an atheist
agnostic,
I don't have a satisfying explanation.
You know, what am I going to say at the
at the foottool of of somebody who's
who's dying of cancer? But it sounds to
me at least today like we don't have a
very plausible alternative in
Christianity. For example, I did have a
few questions which maybe I'll be
permitted the time to to ask and I don't
I don't want to bang on about this, but
it's important because this is
ultimately you're here to represent your
view and a worldview more broadly and
this is to me the question is the
question of suffering and you've
explained your your your views about the
the fool and I wanted to let you put
them in full before I asked a few
questions. But the first question that
jumps out at me is the question of
prehuman suffering.
We're not the first species to inhabit
this planet. And before we existed,
billions of years, I don't know if you
believe that the earth is 4 and a half
billion years old, but but
billions of years, hundreds of millions
of years at least of animal suffering.
>> Yeah.
>> Like, and that is experienced. They they
like if and and you could say that it
somehow is less like relevant or doesn't
matter as much, but if if you saw me
right now step on a dog's tail and watch
it squeal, you'd tell me to stop because
you know that absent
>> just the effect that that has on our
human situation, that's bad for the dog.
That kind of stuff was going on for
hundreds of million years before humans
were around. That means before the fool.
>> That's true.
>> The second question, the second question
I have,
>> let's do one at a time.
>> Uh and I don't entirely know how to
answer that. Um part of the problem
comes when you create a world in a
certain way that has um certain cause
and effect kind of things. So pain is
there for a reason. Pain is there so
that you can avoid something that's
harmful to the body. When you start
feeling pain, you withdraw from it.
Okay? In a very simplistic sense. It
also has a downside and the downside is
that pain is painful and sometimes dying
is very painful too. So there's a
trade-off there. Now I haven't worked
all those details out. Okay. Uh but what
I look at is a larger picture because I
can't refine all of those things for my
own thinking. The larger picture is we
both we all live in the same world that
is filled with pain and suffering. So
then the question is who has the best
explanation at large about how that
works? No explanation. Well, maybe some
are are going to go very granular and
get the here's why your baby is
suffering in this moment for this thing.
We're not going to be able to do that.
But we can understand why the world is
broken. Now, if you if you don't hold
that the world was made for something
better, then the world we see right now
is not broken. It's just the way it is.
There is no moral assessment whatsoever
that we can make that would make any
sense. But we constantly make moral
assessments, which is why you're
bringing this issue up about suffering.
>> I've been very careful to avoid moral
language precisely this reason. Let me
explain how what I'm it seems to me that
you are bringing kind of smuggling in
moral categories with the suffering
issue because if I said I don't care
about the suffering of millions of years
of organisms that had experienced pain
that kind of casts me in a kind of a
negative moral light. You don't have to
say that. It does seem to me that you're
smuggling in the notion that suffering
is bad morally.
>> I know that people often do that. I'm
specifically avoiding that because I've
had this conversation a hundred thousand
times and that's that's the accusation
that that gets brought up and some
people do do that but I'm specifically
you can rewind the tape I make great
pains I don't say the problem of evil
for example I say the problem of
suffering okay
>> if you said that you didn't care about
suffering I would say that you're
probably just being inconsistent with
your Christian worldview for example I
wouldn't say that you're doing anything
immoral in the context of
>> accept the qualification
>> what I'm saying
>> is that if Christianity were true we
would not expect the kind of suffering
that is present in the natural world I'm
Not saying that on my worldview that
suffering is wrong and must be fixed and
there's some moral element. I'm not
saying that at all. All I'm saying is
that it is unexpected if Christianity
were true that that suffering would be
as it is.
>> Well, the way
>> in particular the non-human animals.
>> No, I understand that. Okay. And the way
I'm the way I'm looking at it,
>> do you understand that I'm not smuggling
in those moral moral because you said
that I'm smuggling in moral terminology.
>> Can I buy that? It's okay. I'm not doing
that.
>> Did you have a second question? I did
which is that if the fool is the
explanation for shall we say the the
moral evils that people commit like the
Holocaust the reason why people have a
proclivity to commit the Holocaust is
because of the betrayal of God's trust
few million years ago whenever it was
you think it was um if
if Adam and Eve's transgression is the
explanation for why humans have a sinful
nature and act upon sin
>> then why did Eve act upon the sin before
the fall had happened.
>> Mhm.
>> Eve must have had a proclivity to sin in
order to in order to betray God in the
first place. And so I don't think it
suffices to say that the explanation for
why we have human beings with a
proclivity to sin like Adolf Hitler
>> is because of the fool if the fool is a
result of a proclivity to sin from Eve.
>> Well, the nature of freedom in my
understanding, my view is that it can
initiate things. Okay? You don't have to
have in a certain sense deterministic
element in your in your soul that forces
you to act a certain way. Why did Adam
and Eve Eve in this case act the way she
did? Because she was capable of
initiating a free action free action in
terms of rebellion. Okay, that's the
nature of freedom. Okay, I can't get
into her mind. And I think sometimes
asking questions like this, why did she
under those circumstances do what she
did? I can't answer that. Do you think
she she did something immoral?
>> Yeah, she disobeyed God.
>> And what did she eat from the tree
of the
>> I'm not sure.
>> She ate from the tree of the knowledge
and good and evil. So, she ate from the
tree of the knowledge of good and evil.
Implying that before she ate of it, she
didn't have a knowledge of good and
evil. How could she have done something
immoral before she ate it?
>> Can I ask you a question? Hold on. No, I
this goes to a connection to my view.
So, I just need to clarify this.
>> You understand what I'm saying? Right.
Like,
>> yeah, I understand. I'm entirely sure.
If she hasn't eaten from the tree of the
knowledge of good and evil, she must
have known good and evil. So how does
she know that it's evil? If she hasn't
yet eaten from the knowledge of good and
evil because the knowledge of good and
the word knowledge often times in the
Hebrew is talking about experience.
Okay, it is not talking about mental
awareness. Okay, she wouldn't have been
she wouldn't have not been able to even
understand the command not to do
something if she didn't have those moral
categories. I think that's part of the
image of God in man. Consequently, she
knew she'd ought not do it, but she
still chose, for whatever reason, to do
that. And that act of disobedience
created a big mess.
>> What that means is that the fool does
not explain the proclivity to sin
because Eve already had it. It does not
explain the existence of evil because
knowledge of that already existed before
she committed the fool. It also doesn't
explain the origin of suffering because
of course, Eve's punishment for eating
from the tree of the
>> Well, you're talking about suffering
prior to human beings in animals. Okay,
>> I'm talking about suffering in human
beings. It does it does explain the fall
of man because human beings made a
choice that they could they they could
have made differently but they didn't
and their rebellion against God it had a
consequence I don't think it could be
>> and this is why the rest of the world
has unfolded the way it has why there is
suffering evil in the world uh a
naturalistic explanation can explain oh
suffering before suffering a after but
you've been very careful to make it
clear that there's no moral
ramifications to this at all. It seems
most people are pretty aware that there
are moral ramifications. So if your
world view does not have a way of making
sense or are moral intuitions about
suffering, even animal suffering, it's
not an adequate worldview. Just give me
a minute of your time and I'll tell you
about a device that my team has been
using that they won't seem to shut up
about. It's called the Note Pro and it's
by our sponsor Plaude. This tiny card
clips onto the back of your phone and
captures everything. But why it's so
clever is that it picks up multiple
voices at the same time. And when
someone says something important, you
just push this tiny little button here
and that moment gets highlighted in your
notes and captured. It records the
conversations that it hears, takes those
conversations, creates a transcript, and
it uses AI to synthesize all of that
information into whatever template suits
you. You get a summary, action points,
highlights, and even a mind map sent
straight to the Plaude app. So, I highly
recommend you check out Plaude's
products using the link in the
description below. Don't tell anybody
this, but if you use code DOAC22,
you'll get 22% off on some of Plaude's
products. In my second book, The Diary
of a CEO: 33 Laws of Business and Life,
one of the laws I talk about is always
prioritizing your first foundation. And
by that, I mean your health. After
speaking to hundreds of scientists and
doctors and thinkers, I'm convinced we
can all change the trajectory of our
long-term health through the daily
actions that we take. So, for me,
partnering with our new sponsor,
Function Health, made complete sense.
Their membership includes over 100
advanced lab tests covering hormones,
toxins, inflammation, heart health,
stress, and more. And when you sign up,
you schedule your tests, complete them,
then you're sent a personalized summary
with insights backed by doctors and
thousands of hours of research. And if
anything critical shows up, you'll get a
call from a doctor. These are the
insights most people never get. But you
can get them now. So if you want to
learn more, head to
functionhealth.com/doac
where you can sign up right now. And for
the first thousand of my listeners, you
can get $100 credit towards your
membership when you use the code DOAC
100. But do not tell anybody. That's
DOAC1000.
Alex, you're how do you categorize your
belief or lack of belief? Are you
atheist, agnostic, religious?
>> Agnostic is probably the best the best
term.
>> And how do you define the word agnostic?
>> It means that I I don't I don't know. I
think that a lot of religious language
escapes us. And I'm also not entirely
sure always what what people are exactly
talking about.
>> So if I asked you the question, how did
um how did life come to be on the earth?
What would your answer to that be?
>> Oh, I have no idea.
>> Of course, I have no idea. And how does
someone who is agnostic create a really
meaningful life in your perspective?
>> Well, I don't know how
>> how
>> somebody else might do that because
because crucially I mean we we talked
about this earlier when we talked about
like um
>> we have this brief interlude where you
were sort of saying meaning for humans
and meaning for individuals. And the
reason I make that distinction is
because if you consider the way that
take like scientific progress right from
Galileo's time to today the idea is that
there are some kind of scientific
innovations and then you have a child
and you teach that child the latest
science and then that child will build
upon it and teach their children the
latest and they'll build and so as
generations go on the starting point for
each individual human is like further
along right so you can have a child
who's like 12 now and knows calculus you
know what I mean And with successive
generations, the starting point for each
individual is like further along the
path of discovery.
>> With like meaning and existential
concerns, it doesn't work like that. It
resets every single time. It's not
something you can't figure out like how
to live a meaningful life and experience
meaning and come to some kind of
spiritual enlightenment and then teach
that to your children and that's then
their starting point. For them, it
resets. It's new. So I think that every
individual has to do it on their own for
themselves, right? And we're all doing
that together as it were going around
the world. So the way that I'm
approaching this, we were going to talk
about consciousness, which we didn't.
And perhaps it's a good job that we
didn't because it's it's just such a big
topic. But my views on consciousness are
crucial to my
uh
to my sense of sort of what it's all
about as it were because the greatest
mystery that we are confronted with
every single day if you just take a
moment to remember it is that we are
conscious is that we are experiencing
things from a first person perspective
that I have thoughts which are
inaccessible to you and you have
thoughts which are inaccessible to me.
It's extremely strange. So there's a
view that I'm quite attracted to uh in
the philosophy of mind called pansychism
which literally means sort of like the
view that consciousness is everywhere or
in everything. It's not it doesn't mean
that everything is conscious. It doesn't
mean this pen is conscious. What it
means is that the stuff that the
universe is made out of so the
fundamental matter of the universe has
at least mental properties or might be
mental properties. Because when you say
for example, you know, we're in a world
of like molecules in motion, right?
>> I understand that sentiment. But if you
ask a scientist, what is stuff actually
made out of? Ultimately speaking, they
will not be able to tell you.
>> For you personally, what makes your life
full of purpose and meaning?
>> I can't just jump. I can just jump
there, but it won't make much sense
because what I would say is something
like a recognition of the of the
illusion of divisible selves, which
doesn't make a ton of sense.
>> I can explain
>> unless you unless you lay the
groundwork, which can be can be
explained in many different ways and in
fact is something which most uh like the
Vic tradition, it's one of the reasons
I'm so attracted to it and particularly
the the Apananishads is because they
seem to embody this idea. They they
they're constantly banging on about how
the individual self, the individuated
person is an illusion and there is one
ultimate self. They call it Ant-Man. Um,
>> but are you going to have kids?
>> I don't know.
>> Do you want to have kids?
>> I hope so. Yeah.
>> So, you do want to have kids?
>> Oh, yeah.
>> Why?
>> I'm not sure.
>> I don't know.
I it just feels it feels as though I've
got it's a bit like asking you know
there's a there's a literal explanation
if if you ask me am I going to have
dinner today I'll say yes if you say why
I could say well because I'm hungry but
if you ask me like but but like why like
why why do you care about being hungry
why do you care about satisfying it
>> well I would say I'm agnostic and I'll
say I want to have kids because I think
it will bring a lot of joy to my life I
think I'll enjoy the challenge it's
proven to be
>> for your sake
>> yes
>> so it's not for their sake
I think everything kind of immoral to
>> No, no, no, no, no, no. I think
everything everyone does at some you can
look at the neurological level is for
their sake. The reason why people why
Dr. K works on that ward and saves the
life. It's ultimately because it's
>> so then
>> in a in a way I agree with you but if if
it is true that there is this sort of
thing called consciousness that the
universe is made out of and brains are
kind of complex organizations of
consciousness then when you ask me like
you know why what's wrong with harming
another person on this on this worldview
on this materialistic worldview well I
think the material of the universe is
consciousness and I think that when I
harm someone else it could literally in
a fundamental sense be a be a case of
self harm by by the way Can I just say
because it sounds a little bit insane um
without the space to explain the pansy
worldview it sounds absolutely mental
but there are some there are some really
interesting clues here can I give you
one clue this is really really
fascinating about the fact that the
brain as Aldis Huxley said it was a tool
focusing the mind aldus Huxley writes in
the in the doors of perception essential
reading to anybody interested in
consciousness by the way um Aldis Huxley
in the 20th century takes a psychedelic
drug and he writes about his experience
and he writes about it beautifully and
one of the things he realizes is that
his mind has been opened and he thinks
okay well if my mind has been opened
during this experience then that means
that in normal waking hours something
must be closing my mind what could be
closing my mind answer the brain he
concludes that the brain is a tool for
focusing the mind so the psychedelic
experience this is before we've done any
scientific experiments on this you can
scan people's brains in like an M MRI
scanner, right? Okay. So, when you take
a psychedelic drug, your experience just
blows up, right? You start seeing colors
you didn't know existed. You start
experiencing things as if they were new.
It's like the experience is
unimaginable. So, we've taken people and
we've measured their brain activity and
their and their brain activity is at a
certain level. And then you give them a
psychedelic drug and you put them in the
MRI scanner and their brain activity
goes
down.
brain activity goes down as the mental
experience expands and goes up which for
the person who experiences the
psychedelic drug they will report this
as a feeling that they just get from the
experience. the scientist who measures
the brain activity, the sages writing,
the the Apananishads, the Buddhist monk
after a series of long meditation will
all say the same thing which is that in
some inexplicable way. Consciousness is
more foundational than the brain is and
the brain is focusing consciousness and
in some sense that means that our
individuated selves are essentially
illusory. I'm gonna do my best
>> in the same way the distinction between
objects are a loser
>> to support what you're saying. I I
totally empathize with having fallen
into this mistake of invoking karma and
not having the bandwidth to explain what
I mean,
>> opening myself up to misinterpretation.
That's also why I completely understand
what you said a moment ago, which is
>> so so I think the funny thing about this
is
if we look at the quantification of
meaning.
I think everything that I said about
self-determination theory, you know,
make choices in life doesn't matter what
they are. We get so caught up about
making the right choice. Where does the
concept of right or wrong come from? It
comes from like the social conditioning
around us. When I was 9 years old, my
grandmother's like, "Oh, you're going to
be great doctor one day. Great doctor,
great doctor, great doctor." And so then
I went to medical school. I was premed
and I promptly failed out because the
reason I wanted to be a doctor is
because I thought it was going to be
cool and I was going to go to Harvard by
the way. I was going to be the best
doctor, not just a doctor. And that
didn't really align with my motivational
system at all. It was coming from the
ego. And so I kind of failed out and
then seven years later started med
school a few years later at that. Wound
up ironically training at Harvard and
being faculty there. And so going back
to karma for a second, I I I share this
example because a lot of times when we
look at things that we think are bad and
I'm not saying that cancer applies here
clearly, but this is what the meaning
making the practical functional work of
when someone comes into my office who
was the result who was sexually abused
or something like that. How do we help
that person? We make meaning. So for me
this was I used to think that that there
is no scenario in which a 2.5 GPA is
better than a 4.0 GPA. that in school
getting Fs is in no way better than
getting A's. Now years later I realize
that all of those experiences of
suffering, of struggling, of having no
meaning in life, playing video games for
20 hours a day, joining a fraternity
when I was a freshman, which is lots of
great times, you know, made me the
person that I am. And though even if you
look at the brand of Dr. K, the whole
point was I was a college dropout and
then ended up as faculty at Harvard
Medical School. Amazing, right? So in
this context that a lot of times that if
we sort of the more we are zoomed into
our life, the less we will see this
broader perspective. And this is really
fascinating if you look at the work of
Victor Frankle because Vic Victor
Frankle was a neurologist,
went through the Holocaust, became a
psychologist and then he sort of
literally his work is something called
logootherapy, which is how do we
consistently help people make meaning in
life? And he designed a system of
therapy. And the first part of it is
de-individuation. Is the ability of
zooming out from your thing. When
someone feels like my life is falling
apart, there's no point anymore. Why?
Because I just got dumped and she's
never going to talk to me again.
>> Zoom out a little bit. This is not the
end of the world. Your life is bigger
than this one thing. So the more that we
zoom out from a mechanistic perspective,
>> the more meaning we find in life. And
what is the ultimate zooming out?
Relationship with God. because now we're
way out here, right? This isn't about
you. This isn't about someone dying of
cancer. This is about something that
goes way bigger than you. So, what I
would say is you can do all the
scientific stuff. It'll get you to 8 out
of 10, maybe nine out of 10. But, and
this is what's so crazy, the scientific
stuff I am incredibly confident I can
defend.
>> I can point to studies. We can talk
about psychedelics, the default mode
network, self-determination theory,
logootherapy. There are tons of studies,
radical acceptance, dialectical
behavioral therapy, all of these things,
acceptance and commitment therapy, all
of these things have to do with making
meaning in the world. But if you really
want to find that meaning, you keep on
asking this question. I mean, you
selected that question because you're
looking for it, right? And you won't let
him get away with some philosophical
explanation. You're like, "No, you tell
me when you wake up. Where is it? Show
me where it is. Show me how to get it."
because you don't understand his
because you've never had a direct
experience of mine. And so you're like,
"Bro, you don't know God. How do you
find it?" The desperation of like, "No,
no, no slipping away, Alex. No random
stories and ending up in a not random,
sorry. No stories that end up in a
delightful way." Right? So, how do you
find that that last chunk that last way
that last step of the way there is
through the direct experience of
Brahman.
So when he says pansychism
in the Hindu system, we believe that
consciousness is the foundational
element of the universe.
>> Atman is Brahman.
>> Atman is not Brah well sort of yes and
no. Atman is individual soul. Brahman is
the cosmic soul. The cosmic
consciousness that the fundamental
thing that is out there is transcendent.
And having a relationship that with that
thing is how we get meaning. This is how
we get a 9 out of 10 or a 10 out of 10
meaning because this guy has done
something where he had this experience
where he's been talking to God but one
day someone answered the phone
>> and when you have that transcendent
experience when you have this direct
experience of the Brahman and this is
why I've been avoiding saying it because
it's completely undefensible
it is what I believe is philosophically
true it is what I believe is absolutely
true
>> and it is not transmissible it can only
be witnessed.
>> Exactly. That's that's the most
important point is that and it's why I
say that this is something that
everybody has to start a fresh because
if there is an answer to this question,
it is something that you
>> that you cannot syllogize. By the way,
this isn't just some like you know Hindu
thing like Christians say the same thing
about their religious experiences. The
>> the ineffable quality William James
famously tried to identify the
characteristic aspects of religious
experience and one of the most important
was the ineffability. the inability to
explain is what that means. Like the
inability to put into words and to
explain and to say what it's like and
interestingly some of my favorite
examples of this throughout history have
been some of the most important
Christian thinkers of all time who've
essentially abandoned the project of
communicating ideas to other people. I
mentioned Bla1 Pascal earlier. He
famously had his night of fire where he
has a religious experience and he's one
of the greatest writers in Christian
history and he has this experience of
God and he writes in his diary and later
has it etched into his jacket fire he
writes
>> not the God of the philosophers the God
of Abraham the God of Isaac the God of
Jacob because he realizes that he's
experienced something which is not this
abstract first cause design of the
universe it's not that it's something
more deeply personal Thomas Aquinus
undoubtedly the greatest metaphysician
of Christian history writes the Suma
Theologica which is to this day one of
the most celebrated works of Christian
metaphysics trying to you know explain
and analyze the nature of God. It's
where we get his famous five ways of
showing the existence of God and all of
this kind of stuff and it's it's really
long and still still studied in depth to
this day. He left it unfinished
when he died. Why? Because one day he
was performing the Eucharist and he had
a religious experience. He believed that
he experienced the presence of God and
he stopped writing it and he was he was
practically begged by a friend and
patron like Thomas you've you've you've
got to you've got to finish the book and
he wrote back and said I can write no
more after what I've seen it's like
straw compared to the experience I've
had. But quite clearly when you look at
people who actually report the stuff
that people want which is the certainty
the experience where they say I've I've
met God and I know what that feels like.
The number one characteristic of such
experiences is that they are not
transmissible is that you cannot write
it down and give that experience to
somebody else.
>> So here's the beautiful thing. You can't
down you can't write down the experience
but you can absolutely write down the
process
>> of finding that experience.
>> Yes. So I'm with you. That is an
individual journey.
>> And I think this is where something
really interesting. I don't know if this
is like accurate or not, but I sort of
noticed that all of our most common
religions have spiritual traditions that
are not necessarily the same as the
religion.
>> Yeah.
>> So in Hinduism, it's really interesting
because we have priests and then we have
swamies. A priest is not a yogi. So the
person who does the practice of the
religion is not the same as the person
who sits in the Himalayas and meditates
for 12 hours a day. And even if we look
at like Christianity, you know, I I
know. So I I read a Gnostic text for the
first time.
>> Which one?
>> Um, Thunder Perfect Mind.
>> And what I realized is, oh, I know
exactly what this is. I I I read some
stuff about it and people were like, oh,
it's talking about this. I'm like, no,
it's not. Thunder Perfect Mind is a
series of meditation techniques. That's
what it is, right? That that's what it's
a series of meditations. And if you do
these meditations and there's all kinds
of stuff and I I think you know Sufiism
was there, Cabala is there in Judaism,
there's the Gnostic tradition. Every
religion has this spiritual component
which sometimes comes down to going to
church, witnessing God. But you know,
the whole thing is like you got to have
fingers crossed, which is part part of
the way why why it's designed because
there's no definitive way to do it. You
have to have God's grace to get it.
>> There's a certain amount of surrender.
There's a certain amount of ego that you
have to get rid of in order to open
yourself up to God. But there are a
series of practices that you can do that
will cultivate
the right setting for God to pick up the
phone.
>> These are things that we will sort of
use psychedelics.
>> It's a very good evidence for the use of
psychedelics. I was about to say.
>> Yeah. So psychedelics will do this kind
of thing where it it takes you to that
state to a certain degree, but there's
way way way further to go than what
psychedelics can do. I I would say
psychedelics take you to a helicopter to
about 6,000 ft. You can go to 20,000 ft,
30,000 ft. Have experiences of Brahman.
And this is where all of these like
weird esoteric practices from the the
science of yoga kind of like now that we
have so much like mc mindfulness
everywhere where everyone's got apps and
stuff like that. We've lost a lot of the
most important stuff that if you want to
have a transcendent experience, there
are things you have to do with your
diet. There are things that you have to
do with your respiratory rate. You have
to set up your body's capacity to handle
metabolic acidosis because Yeah.
>> And you've done this yourself.
>> I will not answer that question.
>> You can you can answer the question
whether you've done it or not.
>> I can I will not.
>> Why?
>> Uh the cost to my shaky is too high.
>> So I I asked you this question before.
Do you remember?
>> What did I say? You told me that you
have seen things and gone to a place.
But when I asked you what you saw, you
told me you wouldn't tell me.
>> Yeah.
>> But you're happy to say that you have
done this.
>> No, I didn't say that I have done this.
>> That's what you said to me last time.
>> Oh, yeah. Well, maybe I made a mistake.
I mean, sort of. So, if that's what I
said last time, that's my answer then.
My answer today is I will not talk. I
will not answer that question.
>> And the reason you won't answer the
question is because
>> the depletion of the shaky is too high.
>> And what does that mean?
Okay. So,
okay. So,
>> it sounds like I'm locked out the house
like I can't
>> there are many reasons but okay. So,
pansychism there's this idea that
>> there's this weird collective
consciousness that's the basic unit. I
think we can easily call it God a
relationship with that thing. So, I'm
down here it's up there. So the key
thing is if we look at psychedelic
usage, if we look at dark night of the
soul, if we look at these moments of
rapture where you go into church and one
of two things is happening. Either your
psychological defense mechanisms are
creating the ultimate cope and you're
saying now I'm healed even though you're
not or you actually have a direct
experience of God and you are
transformed. What is the nature of that
transformation? It is the loss of ego.
That is the most conserved thing. We
surrender before God. Before God, we are
nothing. Right? Doesn't matter which
religion you talk to. This is all this
is where I think that there's like
evidence of truth with a capital T
because human beings from all over the
planet have done these explorations
using the technology of our mind and our
consciousness and we arrive at very
similar conclusions. So the beautiful
thing is that when so when our ego is
active in the most powerful way, it
becomes narcissism also becomes things
like depression. still actually a very
ego. I'm terrible. I'm pathetic. I'm
worthless. The world would be better off
without me. The focus is on me, me, me,
me, me. It's hyperactive default mode
network.
>> Mhm.
>> So, in order to connect to the divine,
you need to dissolve your ego as much as
possible.
>> So, the reason you won't tell me is
because
>> if I say it, my ego will increase. You
also will not what what'll happen is
you'll get an idea of it, right? The
more I talk about it, the more that your
mind will create a map without
experience. So I do not discuss my
experiences in meditation. What I will
absolutely say though and this is what I
love about it. Alex said this is the one
thing we cannot stand on the shoulders
of giants. You have to walk this whole
journey by yourself. No one else can
walk it for you. So I won't tell you how
far I've gone. Maybe I'm a maybe I'm
just, you know, talking Who knows?
But what I will tell you is that you
don't need the answer from me. Why are
you asking me? Because you want to know
then you walk it.
>> If you see the Buddha, kill him. That's
the meaning of this or the one
interpretive meaning of this of this
Buddhist Cohen is is stop looking for
gurus and start looking inside yourself.
>> Do you think I could then sit here and
say what your experience is not true?
And I
>> absolutely.
>> Yeah.
>> Of course.
>> And I could and I could pick it apart
and stuff like that.
>> Absolutely. So So this is the thing that
I
>> Is there any value in that
>> from what? for me doing that to you.
>> Of course, there's value for you if you
wanted to. If you want to pick me apart,
if you want to continue to live the life
that you you live, if you want to
continue to get five out of 10 meaning
cuz you've accomplished a lot, if accomp
you have a a lot of stuff, I mean, so
many videos that you have left, so many
people that you help, millions of people
across the globe,
>> right?
>> I say this because that's what's
happening here.
>> What
>> that Alex is picking apart.
>> Fine. So, so I have no problem with
picking things apart. If you want to
pick things apart, pick things apart.
But be very clear about what picking
things apart does.
>> What does it do?
>> So, it's it's a great question. I have a
different way of answering it.
So, when I listen to philosophers like
these guys were just in it about evil
and if if if evil was created when Eve
ate the apple, was she evil when she
made the apple? Right? It's so great.
It's picking things apart. So, it's so
interesting because as a psychiatrist,
my training is actually the exact
opposite. What I've trained myself to do
is to twist and turn in mental
gymnastics to understand somebody else's
view. When a patient walks into my
office and they say, "I'm suicidal," I
don't want to pick their view apart. No,
you have so much to live for. It doesn't
work. I try to understand them. So,
there is value to picking things apart
in terms of political debate, in terms
of you're arguing with your wife whether
you should buy a car or lease a car.
There are all kinds of values to picking
things apart. But the question is, what
do you want? Now, I think if you take
Alex's road, which I think is going to
change real quick if it hasn't.
>> Why?
Be honest.
>> I think he he's going to go down the
road of nosis if he isn't already.
>> Nosis.
What What is Nosis?
>> Knowledge,
>> Alex.
>> Nosis is a it's a Greek term. Nosis
means knowledge. Um but it's attached to
I guess a kind of an ancient school of
philosophy which believes that uh truth
is is obtained from looking inward.
>> Do you mean narcissism?
>> Not not narcissism. So I I think if if
you want to, Alex, it's not a
philosophy. It's a practice.
>> But what what do you mean when you say I
mean Stephen asked you said I'm going to
go down a
>> I think you got to walk down the Gnostic
road. Dude,
>> would you tell us what you didn't just
say? You said you thought I was going to
do that. What? What? What does it mean
>> that I think you're going to do that? Or
the the path of
>> what is the thing that you think I'm
going to?
>> Yeah. I think you're going to have to
start practicing Gnostic stuff.
>> What's Gnostic stuff?
>> What does that mean?
>> So, Thunder Perfect Mind is a series of
meditations.
>> If you look at that and you do what it
tells you to do, you will understand
what the Gnostics understood. You have
to walk that path that they walked. But
doing so does not involve the philosophy
of Nosis,
>> right? that the part of Nosis I don't
know what the philos I mean I get what
you're saying from a philosophical
perspective but the gnostics were p
practitioners as far as I understand I
read one gnostic text and I was like oh
this is like a this is like a meditation
as far as
>> so what is it that makes you think why
do you look at me and say that's
I mean you've read one gnostic text
>> I have an intuition
>> so but I wonder what what you mean
>> it's not explainable
>> but but you have an intuition
>> based on pattern recognition
>> sure
>> that an individual like Alex,
>> I don't know. No, not pattern
recognition. This is indefensible.
>> Okay.
>> I get told a lot by a lot of different
people that I'm quite clearly on a
particular road. Christians Christians
very often
>> say that it seems as though I'm on the
verge of Christian conversion. And I
think that's often just a result of
having nice conversations with them
where I don't jump down their throat and
say, "Actually, there's some uh there's
some truth in this or actually there are
some good arguments of the resurrection
of Jesus or this kind of stuff." And
suddenly I have people saying, you know,
he's so close.
>> Is that kind of annoying? Clearly a man
searching for meaning.
>> Something about tell us what Nosis is.
You said it's a series of practices, but
like what? So is, you know, so is
vegetarianism. So like
>> So I I think nosis from what reading one
text, I'm not a gnostic expert.
>> Okay.
>> So there's a set of practices that if
you do them have a high probabilistic
chance of having a direct experience of
God.
>> Like what? So m chanting is a simple
example but there are things that you
can do to increase the likelihood of
having a transcendent experience of
chanting. So for example if you adopt
siddhasan so siddhasan is a particular
yoga posture where um your left heel is
placed against the perennium of your
>> body. So the perennium is the the taint
the area between the anus and the
scrotum. So if you also do certain bron
practices, so these will do things that
induce a very very very low respiratory
rate and one of the things that we know
about transcendental experiences is that
high levels of CO2 tend to make actually
we don't know this but this is kind of
the best hypothesis that I've read that
I happen to think is true that if we
alter the neurons of our brain chemistry
we can evoke transcendental experiences.
So if you look at some of these esoteric
traditions, what'll happen is is you
have all of these different practices
and as you do these practices, I think
you are very clearly refining your
physiology and your neurology to induce
certain states. And let's remember that
psychedelics don't create anything.
>> Yes,
>> psychedelics simply activate the
circuitry that is already there
>> or deactivate. Huh?
>> Or deactivate
>> or deactivate, right?
>> But yeah, that's that's a crucial point
to make. I I'd love to understand why
you think he's going to go down that
path.
>> Let's call it intuition,
>> but I I need something a little bit more
than that. So, you're saying
>> Okay. So, I I'll give you more. So, in
um the system of So, can I answer
truthfully or defensively? Truthfully,
which ones do you guys want?
>> Truthfully, truthfully.
>> So, in the system of Kundalini yoga,
there are seven chakras. So 21 years ago
20 almost 22 I went to a teacher who
taught me the first of a kundalini
practice which is based on the agna
chakra. So the agna chakra is your third
eye chakra and gives you it is the
chakra that governs understanding. So if
you want to understand things
then agna chakra practices are the right
thing to do. So many years ago, back in
a former life when I was uh still an
academic at at Harvard, I was trying to
develop an evidence-based meditation
program for different diagnosis. And
part of what I leaned into and initial
results were good, but never really, you
know, then I started doing this. But so
as one example, there's this chakra
called the mooladhara chakra, which is
our root chakra. So the muladhara chakra
governs our primal impulses in life. So
I looked at my patients with addictions
and I was like okay these people have a
problem with impulse control and they
want something and they can't restrain
themselves from getting it. So I
wondered can I teach them mooladharak
chakra practices to sort of basically
like reduce their flow of wanting the
basic things and I found that that was
efficacious. Now meditation works for
addictions then but the question is can
we do a specific meditation for a
specific mental illness. So there are
there's one study for example that looks
at anahhat or heart chakra meditation
specifically for depression because it
cultivates like compassion and self-love
and stuff like that and they found it's
a very small study hopefully the the
we'll do more research in this but they
found that the effect was superior to
other forms of meditation. So
hypothetically, theoretically, there are
specific meditation practices which work
in different ways and I teach a lot of
this stuff in in Dr. K's guide to
meditation and stuff. But so there are
these specific practices. So I
specifically did a a practice based on
agnakra stuff like intuition, right? So
then like something weird happens which
is when I sit with people, I have
intuitions about them. Now is this real?
Is this fake? is a delusional I don't
know. You could argue that I'm just a
really good psychiatrist with really
good cold reading, right? But I this is
a I I don't So if you want to know the
real answer, like I'm not a great
psychiatrist. People think I'm so
brilliant as I'm not. I'm cheating. I'm
using a a layer of information that I
don't think most people have access to.
Which I know is a completely
undefensible claim. Except
if you do agna chakra practices too, you
will see what I'm talking about.
>> Alex, if I were to ask you that if
someone's listening now and they feel
lost in their life, is there any advice
that you could give them
or a simple action that they could take
that would help them to find
to remove the feeling of feeling lost in
life. Hm.
It's always difficult because it's such
an individual thing that it's difficult
to give uh advice
writ large. Um also because
I'm no paradigm of meaning and purpose
in life and not some fountain of wisdom
from which people can drink. Um so I
wouldn't presume to do so. But if a
friend So if they came to me as I'm the
guy on the camera with the microphones
and stuff, so what do I do? I would say
>> probably the reason a lot of people
click this video.
>> Yeah. I I would say that firstly stop
doing that. Like don't stop clicking the
video everybody. Like and subscribe.
>> But stop thinking
you're going to find
some kind of teacher or guru who is
going to give you the answer. Instead,
the most valuable form of person to
listen to, I think, and I found is
somebody who's quite clearly also trying
to do the same thing. There are people
out there who think they've achieved
certain things. They've they found
meaning. They've understood the truth
and you can learn a lot from them trying
to explain their worldview to them. Um I
don't claim to be such a person. So the
only thing I can do is say like I'm
actually doing this at the same time as
you. So I can't give you advice from
experience. I can't say here's what to
do to find meaning. Here's what I did.
What I can say is here are some things
that I'm trying. For example, I'm really
interested by this question of
consciousness and what it means to say
that reality is fundamentally mental and
that we've made a mistake in thinking
that complexity produces consciousness
and rather complexity allows
consciousness to do particular things
like memory and emotion and stuff like
that. That's really exciting and there
are some implications of seeing the
world in that way. Implications about
the the unity of experience.
>> But you're saying pursue answers.
Yes, pursue answers, but also try to try
to try to experience it as you get like
I I kind of depends who it is and I
don't like to say on camera exactly, but
psychedelics can be really really useful
for a lot of people. They can if if you
are
not in the right mindset, as they say,
if you're a bit disintegrated, if if
like it can the reason I don't like to
advise it is because it can bring about
a very bad experience for a lot of
people.
>> But you're saying within the right
certain setting,
>> something like that might be what I'd
recommend. It depends who I'm talking
to, but there are friends in my life,
for example, who I would say don't take
psychedelics. You know, I'd like I from
from from my experience, I just don't
think it seems like the right thing to
do. But there are other friends who I
would say if you did in the right
circumstance, I think this could this
could blow open.
>> Would you categorize yourself as being
lost and directionless?
>> To some degree, of course. Yeah. To to
to some degree, everybody is. Um lost.
Lost is is quite a heavy word. Like when
people say, "I'm lost." By volunteering
that information, they they tend to be
implying that it's a strong enough
feeling that they're troubled by it and
want to make it.
>> Are you happy?
>> That's why people say it. But when when
you ask
>> Well, there are different questions
here, right? Like, am I happy right now?
Sure. Like tomorrow, maybe not across
life.
>> If you had to rate your contentment in
life out of 10, I'll do the same.
>> It's not It's not a very easy thing to
quantify. Yeah, but I give do you think
but I asked I've asked hundreds of
people 400 people this question or
everyone in the podcast has been I asked
Dr. Okay, this question jump in and let
me just finish this train of thought. So
I can say to you for example, yeah, I'm
like a five out of 10 contentment.
>> Is that is that true?
>> Like maybe. Yeah,
>> let's I'll give you a simple way to
quantify.
>> I I literally can't quantify. And the
reason
>> I'll give I'll give you a way to
quantify. I'll give you the yard stick.
So if you think about how old are you?
>> 26.
>> 26. So you think about this 26 years.
>> Mhm. Has there been months of your life
where consistently you've felt really
fulfilled and positive for month, you
know, weeks, months in a row?
>> Um,
probably. Yeah, I think so.
>> Memory memory's difficult to
>> When was the last time for a full month,
for a full 30 days, you felt
>> really good on average?
>> Out of 10, what what counts?
>> Really good on average.
>> I don't know. It might have been usually
when I have some kind of project. I as I
said I think meaning is is intimately
tied up to having a task to fulfill. So
when I've been touring for the purpose
of filming podcasts and doing talks and
stuff like I feel pretty content because
I wake up and I know what my task is for
the day and I get it done. So on a on
like a subjective psychological level
those are probably the times when I wake
up with the most let's say drive the
feeling that I've got a task to fulfill.
And are there days where you feel are
there there weeks sometimes or months
where you feel the opposite which might
be characterized in a clinical context
as depression? That's interesting.
>> Can I ask why you you were interested in
my in in my answers to those questions?
>> I was trying to see how similar we we
are.
>> That's really it cuz we're both we both
sit in the same agnostic camp,
>> but actually we're we're very very
different um in terms of our I wake up
in the morning and I wake up this
morning and I'm very happy and I feel
very very driven and I couldn't wake I
was actually the night before I couldn't
wake up. I was annoyed I had to sleep
because I couldn't wait to get up in the
morning. And that's typically my
experience. I'm like, I can't wait to
get the sleep done with because I can't
wait to get back to life.
>> So, what's it all for?
>> I don't really This sounds crazy. And it
also somewhat links to what you're
saying about at the very beginning about
people being really obsessed with not
dying.
>> I don't really care. I'm just having a
great time.
>> But that's and I love having these
conversations because I get to I get to
learn more about different people's
strategies to having a great time and to
making their lives more meaningful and
more exciting on a daily basis. But is
that that sounds quite nihilistic in a
way because it you sound like Cohellet
in the book of Ecclesiastes who's sort
of eating and drinking and being merry
who one day might look at it and realize
that although you feel in the moment
this is all very good it's it's all he
and realize that there needs to be
something more and I wonder if the same
thing will happen if the if the north
star that you have for your life and
your projects and your career is that
you just sort of feel good while you're
doing it.
you. And why isn't that good enough
reason? Because because in your
presumption there, you're saying because
someday I might get hit by this bus of
realizing that it was worth nothing. But
for the for the 70 years up until I die,
>> Yeah.
>> I'm going to wake up in the morning,
feel good. I'm going to love spending
time with my girlfriend and my dog.
>> Mhm.
>> And whatever neurochemicals in my brain
are going to reinforce me to keep doing
that. And
>> does it bring meaning?
>> Yeah.
>> What does that mean to you? Cuz because
and the reason I asked that is because
conceivably you can imagine someone
who's happy but their life isn't
meaningful and you can imagine someone
who's suffering but their life is
meaningful like a victim of the
Holocaust or something right
>> parents as well.
>> And so you've got the happiness part but
you also think that you've got sort of
meaning and where's the what is that
meaning and where's that coming from?
>> So meaning for me is something that I
create by the decisions that I take. And
this might go down to what you were
saying about having certain tendencies.
I have certain tendencies. I have nature
and nurture acting against me to make
certain things feel meaningful to me.
>> Um, and one of those things is this
pursuit of more information. I do it
when you go and I get some free time
tonight. I'll be on YouTube learning
about humanoid robots or I might stumble
across a video, one of your videos,
which I've watched many times and I've
watched your videos many times and I've
watched your videos many times. Not
because I necessarily believe I'm ever
going to get to the final answer,
because it's the the the doing itself
that I find so enjoyable. And actually,
I could kind of relate to the guy that
knows the world's going to end but
writes the book.
>> Yeah.
>> Because it's the it's the writing of the
book that I love.
>> So here here's what I think is
beautiful. So I think if you guys go
back and you watch this, every
scientific principle is what Steven is
doing. So self-determination theory,
right? So he's self-directed. He
stretches his capacities. He relates to
other people. And I think this is it's
it's a really brilliant example of sort
of like this problem of finding like
meaning with a capital M. And relates to
this kind of idea of, you know, if
you're feeling directionless in life, I
don't know that you need to figure it
out with a capital M. And if we listen
to some of your questions, right, is it
enough for you? And then Stephen's like,
why wouldn't like, you know, why do you
assume that you need? So there's sort of
this very natural like reaction and then
he's kind of like no I'm actually pretty
content. And I think that my favorite
thing about your answer is that getting
as far as you have I think you've got
your instinctual answer of five out of
10 is still correct
because this is as far as you go and I
think you feel this hunger for like
something else and that thing is going
to be big, right? And I I think that's
that's what maybe Greg can help us out
with, right? because and I think that's
that's it's it's a it's a beautiful way
of embodying I think how we find meaning
in life. There's a bunch of
psychological stuff that you can do, but
it appears that doing some of this weird
transcendental like you got to like find
it in sort of this big way.
>> And I think you're a perfect embodiment
of how far you can go. Let me offer a
clarification based on the questions
you're asking Alex because I feel in
many ways very sympathetic to Alex as he
described his subjective states. You
know, are you happy? Are you fulfilled?
Do you have meaning in your life? And I
guess it I think the tendency sometimes
is to talk to somebody who is uh very
confident of their understanding of the
big picture.
>> Um and think that everything is going
wonderful for them. You know, you look
at their life say well everything is
just great. Are you happy? I'm happy all
the time. I have the truth kind of
thing. But that's not exactly how it
works.
>> I'm fully convinced of the truth of the
Christian worldview, God's existence,
Jesus, all the things that relate to
that human beings made in the image of
God. I think it's the best explanation
all things considered for the way things
are. Nevertheless, I'm still a fallen
human being learning to be virtuous with
God's help. I am still living in a world
that is fallen and broken, and I have to
live with all the contingencies of a
fallen world. So if you were to ask me
the question that you asked Alex, I
would have the same difficulty answering
that Alex did because it's so variated
one's life. When I wake up in the
morning, do you feel good? Sometimes,
sometimes not. Am I confident that no
matter what happens in my life, the
good, the bad, whatever, that there is a
foundation there that gives me
stability? Yes. Because I think that
foundation, God, eternal mind exists and
I'm in proper relationship with him. But
part of the reality is this is a veil of
tears. You know, how did Job Job put it?
Something about the uh about the sparks
flying upward. You know, it's like life
is difficult. Uh actually, I like the
saying life is hard and then you die.
You know, it gives me a perspective on
things. Jesus himself said in this world
you'll have tribulation.
>> Are you happy?
>> That's the experience. But the
underlying is be of good cheer. Jesus
said because I have overcome the world.
>> Are you happy?
>> Well, we're back to that question again.
I don't know how you characterize it.
>> You said earlier on that you felt there
was a certain path that Alex was going
to go down, but Greg
>> not going to go going to go down
>> should
>> or something.
>> It's ready for him.
>> Okay. It's ready for him. But you didn't
say that about Greg.
>> Yeah.
>> And so when you look at these two
individuals Yeah.
>> and you think about contentment and
happiness
>> and whatever that word is,
>> can you can you feel with your intuition
that
>> sort of So first thing is this is where
I know it's gonna sound insane.
tanking my brand right now because I
used to be believable I guess but um so
first thing about intuition right if we
look at intuition technically I can't
activate it right when you have an
intuition it comes
>> it happens
>> it happens so that's what's so
frustrating about this is everyone
thinks like okay if you do agna chakra
sadena which is this weird third eye
stuff then you can do this thing I can't
do anything I am before god and when god
chooses
to let me know something. That's when I
get it. Now, if I had to answer, I think
I am not surprised about the difference
in baseline contentment
between these two people. Right? So, if
you were to ask why do I relate to Greg
in this way? Now, whether this is at a
conscious level, neurological level,
whether those whether there's truly a
spiritual level or not, right? So, am I
just reading into him, doing pattern
recognition based on what he says and
stuff like that? But that's not what my
lived experience of of it is. I know
this man has seen God.
>> And it's it's not is it his behavior,
his body language, his No,
>> I mean, I don't think so. Right. So, so
I I've met some people who have very
unhappy lives who still have that
foundation of spiritual contentment and
some people who
have very unhappy I can have unhappy
life with spiritual contentment or
spiritual contentment with a happy life
or be have a great life and have no
spiritual contentment. I think all all
of those variables.
>> What about me?
>> Yeah.
>> What's your intuition about me?
>> I think you're getting there way faster.
You've changed from the last time I
talked to you. I I think you're getting
there and I I think you're going to get
there.
>> Oh, thank God. Where am I going to go?
>> There being contentment, there being
what?
>> There. So, so this is this there is it's
not something that can be put into
words. I'm just going to call it there.
>> If someone's listening right now and
they feel stuck in their life, which is
what I asked Alex, what is something
that they can do tomorrow, a small step
that they can take to become unstuck in
your worldview?
>> Yeah. So I I would start by sort you
know Alex offered a beautiful answer and
I I think he kind of mentioned that I
wouldn't be arrogant enough to give
people things because you know give
people an answer because everyone's an
individual and stuff like that and and
so the funny thing is I I have a super
concrete answer. I think the difference
in sort of the way that I perceive it is
I don't think you have to be someone
great to do that. And that's I think
precisely what sort of science tells us,
right? like is that you don't have to be
some enlightened being and I don't claim
to be that I'm not a guru or anything
like that
>> you know so I I think it starts with
understanding first and foremost that
purpose
how do you know whether you have purpose
something within you tells you right you
can have everyone in the rest of the
world telling you oh you're doing great
you're going to get married in a month
you know there's a baby on the way you
have a career you have all this stuff
you should feel fulfilled so the first
thing to understand is it is an internal
feeling and then the question becomes
how do we create how do we find that
feeling? So this is where things that
get in the way at the top of the list
right now which Alex alluded to is
technology. So unless you can feel what
is going on inside you, you will never
feel purpose. What are the things that
get in the way of feeling? So when you
feel bad, what do you reach for? Right?
How do you manage those negative
feelings? And it's not about making the
feelings go away or not making them go
away. It is simply about stopping the
process of severing yourself. That
process is I I think alexathyia is what
what I kind of refer to it as. That's
colorblindness of your internal
emotional state. Like I have a whole
lecture about it, you know. So first
thing you have to do is learn how to
feel again. Because if you look at most
people who are mean whose life has no
meaning, what they're actually doing is
trying to create a life that is running
away from bad feelings. So I don't like
the way I my boss yelled at me. I'm
going to go to the bathroom. I'm going
to pull out Reddit. I'm going to scroll
on it. Whatever. Right? They're running
away from the way that they feel. And
it's not about good or bad. Just you
have to reconnect with yourself.
>> Second thing is focus on your ego and as
best as possible probably for most
people dissolving parts of your ego. And
ego is anytime you say I am dot dot dot.
It is what's that dot dot dot. So if I
say I'm a doctor, that's part of my ego.
I'm a man, that's part of my ego. So a
lot of times what gets in the way of us
finding purpose is what we believe we
are. Right? So I I may think to myself,
I am a doctor, I am this or I'm all all
those I'm a loser, I'm an incel, right?
So it's all of these identifications
that get us away from purpose.
Third thing to do is find your narrative
sense of identity. So there's some ego
dissolution practices like shunya
meditation and stuff. And then third
thing is we want to develop a story for
ourselves. This is when people have
purpose in life. What does that presume?
That presumes that there's a temporal
quality, that there's a directional
quality. Does that make sense? Like
purpose or direction is like literally
moving from A to Z. So there's time and
then there's like a particular distance
that involves going through the most
important emotional experiences of your
life and stringing them together as a
sense of who you are. And then I think
the last most important step is
recognizing that everything that has
happened to you,
I don't know if it's karma, I don't know
if it's the will of God, whatever it has
happened to you. It's made you in this
way. But it does not determine your
future. Your future is determined by how
you act in the now. And this is where I
would lean into I would just go back and
listen to the way that Steven talks
about his life and try to do the same
thing. So try to decide what your make a
choice for today. Stretch your capacity
and try to connect with another person.
The last thing is if all of that stuff
doesn't isn't sufficient or you want
more, I would say engage in some kind of
spiritual practice or go to church.
Both work equally I don't know about
equally well, but I think they're both
options. So do the thing that appeals to
you more.
>> And the same question for you, Greg. for
someone that's stuck, what do they do
tomorrow to take an action to become
unstuck in in your view?
>> Well, there's a lot of practical things
that have already been shared that I
think are helpful. So, I have a very
simple suggestion. Okay. Um, I have
represented a particular view of the
Christian worldview. didn't get into a
lot of detail, but a lot of people have
prayed a very simple prayer that has
helped them at whatever junction they're
at trying to figure things out. And this
kind of goes to a point that Alex made
earlier and it was a prayer that I turns
out I prayed in 1973. I was in the army
and I was in the middle of nowhere and I
just prayed this prayer. And the prayer
was very simple. God, if you're real, in
the way that my brother, the Christian,
was explaining to me, if you're real,
I want to know it. Show yourself to me.
That was it. There was no coconuts
falling from the tree, no lightning or
anything like that. It was just a man
praying. Maybe the first real prayer
that I'd ever prayed. But I do know that
after that, things became more obvious
to me. It's the best way I can explain
it. Though I'm a Christian apologist, I
make the case for the truth of
Christianity. It wasn't any particular
argument in that that persuaded me. It
was more the experiential thing and not
even a pizzazz thing just a deep
awareness that this was true and this
has set my course. Uh since then I there
are a lot of people who prayed that
simple prayer. It's a genuine prayer
that people can pray and I've heard many
people tell me that this is what
happened to them even apart from my
suggestion to it. So if people are
looking for ultimate purpose in their
life, if they're looking for to do
meaningful things, lots of suggestions
on the table. If they're looking to
integrate meaningful things into the
ultimate purpose, I think that's the
prayer they need to pray.
I want to give you an opportunity, Alex,
to um to give us deliver your sort of
closing thoughts and reflections and
and arguments.
Well,
um I want to re-emphasize that
this topic of meaning and and purpose is
difficult to even define, let alone
communicate to another person. I think
it's individual. Even if there is an
objective meaning, even if God exists
and Christianity is true, it's not going
to be enough to just tell somebody about
Christianity. They're going to have to
live it, right? So, it's not going to be
enough to just sit around reading. I
also understand the sort of allergic
reaction some people have to philosophy
and you hinted at it earlier this idea
that philosophy is just
>> mind games
>> literally philosophical like mass
debating if you like you know we're just
literally sat like throwing concepts at
each other. Uh but on meaning and
purpose,
you're unlikely to find the best advice
from someone who's never gotten out of
that armchair. And even the person who
has and claims to have experienced it
for themselves and and knows what the
truth is. I think anybody who says to
you with a straight face, I know what
the meaning in life is, is either lying
or will instantly tell you that they're
not going to be able to convey that
information, at least not very easily.
So, it's going to be difficult. And
don't trust anyone who says you can do
it in five easy steps on a podcast or
something because I think we've got a
bit of an endemic of that at the moment.
People sort of
just saying that they've sort of
discovered this this path or this truth.
And if only people would understand that
the Stoics were right all along. Even
though I don't care about any of their
any of their philosophical views, just
their ethical views. I don't even know
what they thought about the nature of
matter and stuff. Doesn't matter that
that's why they thought the way that
they did ethically.
you know, just become a stoic and
everything will get better. Um, but I do
recognize some of that and people saying
do just become a Christian and it will
get better too. Um, it's always got to
be a bit more nuanced than that. So,
>> Dr. K, your closing thoughts and
arguments on this today's discussion,
>> you know, to to kind of push back a
little bit against uh what Alex said.
So, I'm I'm with you that there's an
endemic of five easy tips and and you
know, as someone who is guilty of doing
that and what I'll do is I'll I'll see
especially so I I saw a recent study
that showed that 95% of Tik Toks about
ADHD are incorrect.
And so there's there's absolutely an
oversimplification that's going on.
I think at the same time though
we have such an amazing
amount of knowledge as human beings. We
have such amazing access to knowledge
that human beings have. So the human
race has so much knowledge and we have
the greatest amount of access to it. And
so while I don't think it is like as
simple as one of the most shocking
things as a psychiatrist you know who
works with people is how little it takes
to make a big change. Big questions and
big changes don't always need big effort
or big answers. It's it's such an
interesting thing like you know when I
talk to people who struggle with
addiction for 14 years it seems to be a
small thing that just clicks.
And so I I I think the key thing for
people is don't assume that just because
you have a big problem, it requires a
lot of effort.
>> And and you know, I remember my daughter
was trying to close a box, right? So
there's like a box and she's trying to
slam the lid, but the lid is not like
oriented correctly. Does that make
sense? So it kind of gets tilted and
then no matter how hard she pushes, it
doesn't close. And so in her mind, this
is a problem that requires pounds and
pounds. I need to be a full-g grown
adult. No, you're just not doing it in
the right way. Right? If if you
understand a little bit how it works, if
you sort of orient yourself properly and
and I do think that I've seen time and
time again, you know, that that in terms
of an individual perspective, if you
feel purposelessness, there's a reason
for that, right? We know that there's
systemic factors. People are going to
church less, people are using technology
more. All of the way that the world has
has been changed
affects you once it crosses the barrier.
The world is out there and then it
crosses the barrier into us and then
affects us.
And that if you understand that process
and if you change a couple of things and
sometimes it's amazing how small they
are, right? Like just waking up and
making a decision for yourself, pushing
yourself a little bit more. relatedness
is the hard one because that requires
another human being. But like it's
amazing how much you can do with very
little.
>> Thank you. And Greg to close off your
closing thoughts and perspectives.
>> I thought I'd just given them a few
moments ago, but um I guess the
distinction that I I guess I want to
emphasize is when it comes to purpose
and meaning, I think actually meaning
precedes purpose. You have to know who
you are and why you're here. If you're
here for any reason, before the purpose
matches. Now, it turns out that there is
no big picture. It's just you, then the
purpose is going to reflect your
individual desires at any given time and
pursue that as long as you want. But if
there is a grand purpose, that's the
thing to discover. I'm convinced there
is. And I think this is why we have this
hunger for answering these kinds of
questions. And uh there's a lot of
variables that are involved here. But
there and I mentioned before the things
that stand out for me is we have this
internal sense that I think is there
because we are a spiritual being. People
say, "Well, I'm a religious. I'm
spiritual, but I'm not religious." And I
said, "Of course you're spiritual. God
made you that way so that you could know
him." There is that element. This is
subjective. Okay? I think we're all
aware of it. And then there is objective
things that we can appeal to. You
mentioned earlier the resurrection of
Christ, the existence of the world, the
order that the world is in, the
existence of morality, the existence of
free will, all kinds of other things
that are part of the package of the
Christian worldview that are well
explained by that worldview. And one of
the reasons that I'm a Christian is
because I think it's the all things
considered, it's the best explanation
for the way things are. Not because all
of the questions are answered for me.
You embrace some issues that haven't
thought about that. It's a mystery some
of these things but life is filled with
mysteries. All right. And this seems to
be one mystery the big picture that is
resolved by Christianity by the
Christian understanding of reality. I
call it the story of reality.
>> Thank you so much for all being here
today. It's truly fascinating discussion
and it's it has actually pushed me
forward. I shan share how it's pushed me
forward but it's certainly pushed me
forward in a number of ways and it's
helped me to understand you all. I'm big
fans of all of yours. Um, you all make a
lot of great content on YouTube in
various ways. Alex, I've watched your
channel so many times. I've watched so
many of your videos for so long because
you help you kind of represent one part
of my perspective and curiosity and
you're a very um intelligent,
thoughtful, philosophical
uh master of of playing with ideas and
you've really done your homework. So,
it's fascinating to watch your YouTube
channel. I highly recommend people
>> That is quite the accolade. That's very
kind.
>> No, but it is that'll go on the front of
my book.
>> Good. Yeah. Yeah. and your book is on
the way, which we're very excited about.
>> One day, who knows? Who knows when, but
it will come eventually.
>> We'll keep doing what you're doing
because, you know, you're you're a
vessel for for for people. And um who
knows where that vessel ends up going,
but it's a very we all hope.
>> And thank you, Dr. K. You're a master of
what you do. And actually, when you
talked about your your chakra, the one
the one the intuition one, I was sat
here giggling because I've never felt so
naked in front of someone in my entire
life as I do in front of you. And I can
only attest to the the great work that
you do as a result of that bizarre
intuition. I think I told you the f I
think I told other people after the
first time I met you that I think you
have a magic power and it's quite
unnerving to be around someone that I
feel like has a magic power. Um I highly
recommend people go and check out your
YouTube channel. Um you've been on the
show a few times and um the response I
get out and out and about in public is
profound. So thank you for coming back
again. It's really really appreciated
and thank you Greg. Thank you for
writing these incredible books. There's
actually one here which is what you
ended on called the story of reality
which I think is a great starting place
for people that are trying to tease out
some of the the the truths in their own
life.
>> Actually we have a chapter that we would
like to give to your listeners if I can
give the landing page.
>> I'll link all of that below. So I'll
link all of your book books below but
also that free chapter. Thank you so
much everybody.
>> Thanks. Thank you.
>> Thank you.
>> Make sure you keep what I'm about to say
to yourself. I'm inviting 10,000 of you
to come even deeper into the diary of a
CEO. Welcome to my inner circle. This is
a brand new private community that I'm
launching to the world. We have so many
incredible things that happen that you
are never shown. We have the briefs that
are on my iPad when I'm recording the
conversation. We have clips we've never
released. We have behind the scenes
conversations with the guests and also
the episodes that we've never ever
released and so much more. In the
circle, you'll have direct access to me.
You can tell us what you want this show
to be, who you want us to interview, and
the types of conversations you would
love us to have. But remember, for now,
we're only inviting the first 10,000
people that join before it closes. So,
if you want to join our private close
community, head to the link in the
description below or go to
daccircle.com.
I will speak to you then.
This has always blown my mind a little
bit. 53% of you that listen to the show
regularly haven't yet subscribed to the
show. So, could I ask you for a favor?
If you like the show and you like what
we do here and you want to support us,
the free simple way that you can do just
that is by hitting the subscribe button.
And my commitment to you is if you do
that, then I'll do everything in my
power, me and my team, to make sure that
this show is better for you every single
week. We'll listen to your feedback.
We'll find the guests that you want me
to speak to, and we'll continue to do
what we do. Thank you so much.
[Music]
Heat. Heat. N.